8

7

Aptavani - 9
As expounded by the
Gnani Purush Dada Bhagwan

Originally Compiled in Gujarati by :

Dr. Niruben Amin

6

5

Publisher : Mr. Ajit C. Patel
Mahavideh Foundation
Tri-Mandir, Simandhar City,
Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,
Dist.-Gandhinagar-382421,
Gujarat, India.
Tel. : +91 79 3983 0100, 23974100
E-Mail : info@dadabhagwan.org

©

:

Edition

: 1000 copies,

Price

: Ultimate Humality
(leads to Universal oneness) and
Awareness of "I Don't Know Anything"

All Rights Reserved Mr. Deepakbhai Desai
Tri-Mandir, Simandhar City, Adalaj-382421
Dist.-Gandhinagar-, Gujarat, India.

November 2007

Rs. 100.00

Printer

: Mahavideh Foundation
Basement, Parshwanath Chambers,
Nr. RBI, Usmanpura,
Ahmedabad-380014
Gujarat, India.
Tel. : +91 79 27542964 / 30004823

Trimantra
(The Three Mantras)

Namo Arihantanam
I bow to the Lord who has annihilated all the inner
enemies of anger, pride, attachment and greed.
Namo Siddhanam
I bow to all the Lord who have attained final liberation.
Namo Aayariyanam
I bow to all the Self-realized masters who unfold the
path of liberation.
Namo Uvazzayanam
I bow to the Self-realized teachers of the path of
liberation.
Namo Loye Savva Saahunam
I bow to all who have attained the Self and are
progressing in this path in the universe.
Eso Pancha Namukkaro
These five salutations.
Saava Paavappanasano
Destroy all the sins.
Mangalanam cha Saavesim
Of all that is auspicious mantras.
Padhamam Havai Mangalam
This is the highest.
C Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya
I bow to the One who has become the Supreme Lord
from a human being.
C Namah Shivaaya
I bow to all auspicious beings of this universe who are
the instruments of salvation of the world.
Jai Sat Chit Anand
The Awareness Of The Eternal Is Bliss


Books of Akram Vignan of Dada Bhagwan
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

Adjust Everywhere
Ahimsa : Non-Violence
Anger
Aptavani 1
Aptavani 2
Aptavani 5
Aptavani 6
Aptavani 9
Autobiography of Gnani Purush A.M.Patel
Avoid Clashes
Brahmacharya : Celibacy Attained With Understanding
Death : Before, During & After...
Flawless Vision
Generation Gap
Harmony In Marriage
Life Without Conflict
Money
Noble Use of Money
Pratikraman : The master key that resolves all conflicts
( Abridge & Big Volume)

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.

Pure Love
Right Understanding to Help Others
Science of Karma
Science of Speech
Shree Simandhar Swami : The Living God
The Essence Of All Religion
The Fault Is Of the Sufferer
The Guru and The Disciple
Tri Mantra : The mantra that removes all worldly obstacles
Whatever Happened is Justice
Who Am I ?
Worries

Note About This Translation
The Gnani Purush Ambalal M. Patel, also commonly known
as Dadashri or Dada, had said that it would be impossible to
translate his satsangs and the knowledge about the Science of
Self-Realization verbatim into English because some of the
meanings would be lost in the process. Therefore, in order to
understand precisely the science of Akram Vignan and SelfRealization He stressed the importance of learning Gujarati.
Dadashri did however grant his blessings to translate his
words into English and other languages so that spiritual seekers
could benefit to a certain degree and later progress through their
own efforts.
This is a humble attempt to present to the world, the
essence of His Knowledge. This is not a literal translation but
great care has been taken to preserve His original words and the
essence of His message. For certain Gujarati words, several
English words or even sentences are needed to convey the exact
meaning; hence, many Gujarati words have been retained within
the English text for better reading flow. At the first encounter,
the Gujarati word will be italicized followed by an immediate
explanation of its meaning in brackets. Thereafter the Gujarati
word will be used in the text that follows. This serves as a twofold benefit: firstly ease of translation and reading and secondly
it will make the reader more familiar with the Gujarati words
critical for a deeper understanding of this science. A glossary of
all the Gujarati words is provided at the back of the book. For
additional glossary, visit our website at :
www.dadabhagwan.org
Many people have worked diligently towards achieving
this goal and we thank them all. Please note that any errors
encountered in this translation are entirely those of the translators.

5

Introduction to The Gnani
One June evening, in 1958 at around six o’clock, Ambalal
Muljibhai Patel, a family man, and a contractor by profession,
was sitting on a bench on the busy platform number three at
Surat’s train station. Surat is a city in south Gujarat, a western
state in India. What happened within the next forty-eight minutes
was phenomenal. Spontaneous Self-Realization occurred within
Ambalal M. Patel. During this event, his ego completely melted
and from that moment onwards, he became completely detached
from all of Ambalal’s thoughts, speech, and actions. He became
the Lord’s living instrument for the salvation of humankind, through
the path of knowledge. He called this Lord, ‘Dada Bhagwan.’
To everyone he met, he would say, “This Lord, Dada Bhagwan
is fully manifested within me. He also resides within all living
beings. The difference is that within me He is completely
expressed and in you, he has yet to manifest.”
Who are we? What is God? Who runs this world? What
is karma? What is liberation? Etc. All the world’s spiritual
questions were answered during this event. Thus, nature offered
absolute vision to the world through the medium of Shree Ambalal
Muljibhai Patel.
Ambalal was born in Tarasali, a suburb of Baroda and
was later raised in Bhadran, Gujarat. His wife’s name was Hiraba.
Although he was a contractor by profession, his life at home and
his interactions with everyone around him were exemplary, even
prior to his Self-Realization. After becoming Self-Realized and
attaining the state of a Gnani, (The Awakened One, Jnani in
Hindi), his body became a ‘public charitable trust.’
Throughout his entire life, he lived by the principle that
there should not be any commerce in religion, and in all
commerce, there must be religion. He also never took money
from anyone for his own use. He used the profits from his business
to take his devotees for pilgrimages to various parts of India.
6

His words became the foundation for the new, direct, and
step-less path to Self-Realization called Akram Vignan. Through
his divine original scientific experiment (The Gnan Vidhi), he
imparted this knowledge to others within two hours. Thousands
have received his grace through this process and thousands
continue to do so even now. ‘Akram’ means without steps; an
elevator path or a shortcut, whereas ‘Kram’ means an orderly,
step-by-step spiritual path. Akram is now recognized as a direct
shortcut to the bliss of the Self.
Who is Dada Bhagwan?
When he explained to others who ‘Dada Bhagwan’ is, he
would say :
“What you see here is not ‘Dada Bhagwan’. What you
see is ‘A. M. Patel.’ I am a Gnani Purush and ‘He’ that is
manifested within me, is ‘Dada Bhagwan’. He is the Lord within.
He is within you and everyone else. He has not yet manifested
within you, whereas within me he is fully manifested. I myself am
not a Bhagwan. I too bow down to Dada Bhagwan within me.”
Current link for attaining the knowledge of
Self-Realization (Atma Gnan)
“I am personally going to impart siddhis (special spiritual
powers) to a few people. After I leave, will there not be a need
for them? People of future generations will need this path, will
they not?”
~ Dadashri
Param Pujya Dadashri used to go from town to town, and
country to country, to give satsang and impart the knowledge of
the Self as well as knowledge of harmonious worldly interaction
to all who came to see him. During his final days, in the fall of
1987, he gave his blessing to Dr. Niruben Amin and bestowed
his special siddhis upon her, to continue his work. “You will have
to become a mother to this whole world, Niruben” He told her
as he blessed her. There was no doubt in Dadashri’s mind that
Niruben was destined to be just that. She had served him with
utmost devotion day and night for over twenty years. Dadashri
7

in turn had molded her and prepared her to take on this
monumental task.
From the time of Pujya Dadashri’s mortal departure on
January 2 1988 to her own mortal departure on March 19th
2006, Pujya Niruma as she lovingly came to be called by
thousands remained true to her promise to Dadashri to carry on
his mission of the world’s salvation. She became Dadashri’s
representative of Akram Vignan and became instrumental in
spreading the knowledge of Akram Vignan throughout the world.
She also became an exemplary of pure and unconditional love.
Thousands of people from all walks of life and from all over the
world have attained Self-Realization through her and are
established in the experience of the pure Soul, while carrying out
their worldly duties and obligations. They experience freedom
here and now, while living their daily life.
The link of Akram Gnanis now continues with the current
spiritual master Pujya Deepakbhai Desai whom Pujya Dadashri
had also graced with special siddhis to continue to teach the
world about Atma Gnan and Akram Vignan. He was further
molded and trained by Pujya Niruma who blessed him to conduct
Gnan Vidhi in 2003. Dadashri had said that Deepakbhai will
become the decorum that will add splendor to the Lord’s reign.
Pujya Deepakbhai, in keeping with Dada’s and Niruma’s tradition
travels extensively within India and abroad, giving satsangs and
imparting the knowledge of the Self to all who come seeking.
Powerful words in scriptures help the seeker in increasing
his desire for liberation. The knowledge of the Self is the final
goal of all one’s seeking. Without the knowledge of the Self
there is no liberation. This knowledge of the Self (Atma Gnan)
does not exist in books. It exists in the heart of a Gnani. Hence,
the knowledge of the Self can only be acquired by meeting a
Gnani. Through the scientific approach of Akram Vignan, even
today one can attain Atma Gnan, but it can only occur by meeting
a living Atma Gnani and receiving the Atma Gnan. Only a lit
candle can light another candle.
8

EDITORIAL
Life after life, human beings have been struggling for
liberation (moksha). Many times, one has made progress and
many times he has fallen down. What holds one back from
achieving the desired result? Those who are performing the
practices or helping to perform the practices of attaining liberation,
achieve to some degree the success in knowing the ‘Helpful
causes’. To know and see the ‘Harmful causes’ and to remain
unattached from them, can only be done by a Gnani Purush who
manifests very rarely. Once a Gnani Purush has visibly manifested
among us, the path to liberation (moksha marg) opens up
completely. And with that, one can reach all the way to the end
of that path!
One finds the ways up to the path of liberation but while
going up, there are ‘Danger points’ and ‘red signals’ that alerts
one to these danger points, and usually these are not shown. As
significant the upward road is, the knowledge and precautions
for the slippery slopes along the way is of much more significance.
Therefore, without those precautions, no matter how much labor
one exerts, he inevitably falls back.
The success in Self-realization does not occur without the
extremely sharp awareness of where one becomes an impediment
to his own self. This means, in the endeavor of Self-realization,
it is extremely important to stop the losses than to gain the profit.
Once the seeker meets the Gnani Purush and knows and
understands Him, he begins the worship of the path of liberation.
Prior to meeting the Gnani, those who were deeply entrenched
in the worldly life (sansar), now turn towards the path of
liberation. However in their remaining worldly obligations, which
they must fulfill and complete, often knowingly or unknowingly,
they get dragged and immersed back into the worldly life. Who
can show them this ‘leakage’ (their weakness)? To ‘seal’ that
‘leakage’, here in this Aptavani is shown the practical knowledge
9

(vyavahar gnan), the spiritual knowledge (Gnan), the Science
of spiritual knowledge (Vignan), the art of knowledge (gnan
kada) as well as the art of explanation (bodha kada) of the
Gnani Purush.
Moksha-marg means the path to freedom; it is the path of
attaining freedom from all worldly attachments. Whatever practice
one resorts to believing them to be instrumental for his freedom,
it does not give him the experience of freedom. His attachments
are not broken in spite of performing many different practices.
Where is the mistake being made? One should serve the ‘causes
of freedom’ in order to achieve freedom, and whatever causes
one serves, if he experiences freedom and detachment; then only
can he say that the causes served are those for liberation. Instead,
his attachments are not broken in spite of serving the causes for
freedom. Why is that?
The Gnani Purush has seen the complete path to final
liberation. He has known that path, He has the experience of it
and he has completed it. Therefore, he can show us the mistakes
obstructing that path; he can show us the difficulties, obstacles
and dangers along that path. To those who have embarked on
the path of liberation, the Gnani can give complete knowledge
and complete remedy as to how to eradicate those mistakes.
There are mistakes, which cause bondage. People in this
world cannot see those mistakes and so because of constant
bondage due to those mistakes and supporting them, people
have turned away from the path of final liberation altogether.
The Gnanis of the past had cautioned people about the
mistakes that hinder the path to final liberation. However, one
can steadily progress on the path, if the truly desirous devotee
has, prior to achieving the path and after being on the path, a
detailed description of the mistakes that hinder him. Nevertheless,
the correct path is to complete it by completely surrendering to
the Gnani Purush.
10

The Gnanis have said that bondage and obstruction on the
path of liberation is because of kashayas (anger, pride, deceit
and greed). Being absolutely rid of these faults one attains final
liberation. All faults within a person are encompassed in anger,
pride, deceit and greed, but how do these faults unfold and
manifest in worldly interactions? This can only be understood
when The Gnani Purush explains them to us in detail.
Gnani Purush is perfect light, and in his manifest illumination,
it is inevitable that, in order to break free from all one’s mistakes,
one must review and confess all the mistakes (alochana) to the
Gnani Purush. The Gnani Purush, by direct interaction with the
seeker can erase all his inner mistakes. Whenever one has suffered
from pain, has experienced difficulties, uneasiness or lack of
spiritual experience, or has troubling attachments, and he does
detailed alochana to the Gnani Purush, the Gnani will show him
the light. And in that light, he can see all his mistakes, and find
a way to get rid of them.
The main issue is that these mistakes or faults have
remained in the form of ‘tubers’. These tubers are always buried
‘underground’ (they remain hidden within). Under the right
circumstances, when these tubers get ‘water’, they germinate
and sprout into branches and leaves, and from that, one can
discover which kind of tuber he has; he can discover what
‘disease’ lies within him. Unless the nature of the mistakes is
identified, the mistakes continue to get support and nourishment.
By coming to the satsang of the Gnani Purush, by repeatedly
listening to his speech, and by repeatedly understanding his
interaction with specific questioners, the seeker develops
awareness and gets the strength to identify and visualize his own
mistakes and faults. After that, he gains awareness to weed out
the sprouts and by effectively practicing this; he can completely
eradicate the tuber. However, this process has to be carried out
under the guidance and instructions (Agnas) from the Gnani Purush
11

who shows him his mistakes in detail, helps to identify the nature
of those mistakes, thus helping him become free from them.
Thus is perfected the path of final liberation (moksha marg).
Here in this Aptavani is the speech of Dadashri who is the
manifest form of pure Absolute knowledge. This compilation of
the causes that obstruct the path to final liberation is presented
in an eloquent, basic and heart-touching discussion, for all on the
path of liberation. It will help the spiritual practitioner at every
step from falling down. In this Aptavani, if the informed reader
finds any defect or shortcoming, it is not because of the Gnani’s
speech, but because of the defect of compilation. For that, we
offer apology and prayer.
- Dr. Niruben Amin


12

PREFACE
By Dr. Niruben Amin
From time immemorial, prakruti, which is the non-self
complex (also known as the relative-self), is characteristically
bound by worldly affinities. When one meets a ‘Gnani Purush’,
he enters into spirituality i.e. non-worldly affinities. However the
prakruti, which was created in the past life and its inherent
tendency to remain bound to the worldly life, will not refrain
from manifesting when circumstances of nature pressure it. And
in the current time cycle of Kaliyug, the effects of past karma of
the relative-self are such that they oppose and mostly obstruct
final liberation. In such times, to win the conflict between worldly
entanglements and spiritual efforts to attain the real Self, the
Gnani Purush gives many explanations of His experiential
understanding here.
1. Obstinacy (aadayee) : To be upset and noncommunicative
(risavu) : Manipulative tantrum (tragu)
Those who are straight and simple achieve straight and
simple liberation. Gnani Purush is straight and simple in every
way. His statements are proven true in all three times; the past,
present and future. For any man who comprehends the
statements of such a Gnani Purush, his liberation is at arms
length. Gnani Purush says that obstinacy is an obstruction on the
path to liberation, and if one can straighten out, then he can
become God. What is wrong in becoming straight through your
own understanding as opposed to becoming straight after taking
a beating from others?
If you admit to your obstinacies, they will go away but if
you deny them, they become stronger. You can only win over
obstinacies by acknowledging and then ‘seeing and knowing’
them.
You have the right to see only your own obstinacies.
13

However, you can only see them when you attain impartial
vision, or if someone points them out to you and you examine
them. Then that would be the scope to remove your obstinacies.
However, if you see other people’s obstinacies, it is regarded as
your own obstinacy. Your obstinacies will vanish the moment
you start to see them.
One becomes God when his obstinacies are completely
gone.
When a true statement that is satisfying to the heart is not
accepted, that verily is the nature of obstinacy. Obstinate people
behave according to their own opinions. Obstinacies end in
those who behave according to the Gnani’s opinion.
The finest qualities of the prakruti (the innate nature of
one’s relative Self) are freely available to everyone on the path
to liberation. These qualities are ultimate humility, extreme
simplicity, spontaneous forgiveness, and total lack of obstinacy.
These qualities can be regarded as measures of spiritual
progress.
To be aware of one’s own obstinacies is verily called
awareness!
Obstinacies may have lessened, however if one has ‘myness’ (mamata), then he is absorbed in the worldly life only.
Whereas, if there is no ‘my-ness’ and if the subtlest obstinacies
have ended, one will become a Gnani.
The root of obstinacy is the ego. If a person has faith in
the opinion of ‘people will only shape up if I sulk, remain
obstinate, upset and non-communicative (risavu)’, then obstinacy
will not refrain from manifesting in his behavior.
If you become obstinate with the Gnani Purush, you will
not get any support or encouragement from Him. There, in front
of the Gnani, one has no choice but straighten out and shape up!
Obstinacies succumb and bow down to the one who is
14

nispruha (without any inclination towards needs, or desire, of
any material things of this world). The one who has the virtue of
being straight will naturally receive the grace of the Gnani Purush
who himself is completely straightforward in everything.
One is considered to have become straightforward when
he knows his own obstinacies. The obstinacies can be identified
only if one has the Knowledge of his real Self. And only then
can they be reduced and ultimately eradicated. On the other
hand, the one who is obstinate will completely miss the whole
path of liberation.
Obstinacy arises in making others do according to your
will. By doing according to the will of others, obstinacies come
to an end.
“To have the knowledge ‘the one who is obstinate is not
I’ is called Akram Vignan, which is a step-less (short-cut) path
to Self- realization and ‘the one who is obstinate is I and I have
to straighten out’, is called Kramic path, which is a step by step
path (you progress one step at a time).”
~ Dadashri
To be upset and non-communicative (risavu) is also a
type of obstinacy. Who is at a loss from becoming upset and
non-communicative? Will the train wait for the one who remains
upset and non-communicative? The train will leave right in front
of him. The world will not stop for him at all.
If someone is being upset and non-communicative (risavu)
with you, he is being so with the one that is a risad in you; i.e.
the one that gets upset and non-communicative within you. The
risad within you is seeing the one who is upset and noncommunicative. The risad within you is not the real Self. The
one who is upset and non-communicative (risavu) with you is
not the real Self either. The Self sees the Self; the Self sees the
pure (shuddha) only. Inherent in this, is the path of liberation.
15

If someone is upset and non-communicative (risavu) with
the Gnani Purush, how does the Gnani Purush deal with him?
Only the Gnani can explain the state of absolute detachment
(vitaragata)! The excellence of the manifest Gnani Purush is in
His unattached state, along with his nishkaran karuna (Gnani’s
compassion for us in which He has no ‘personal gain’ or
agenda. This is the only ‘reason’ and ‘purpose’ of the Gnani’s
compassion is to take us to our Ultimate Freedom, or Moksha).
As a result, we become free of faults and become steady on the
path of liberation and attain the bliss of the Self.
In the advancing stages of obstinacies, one becomes upset
and non-communicative (risavu) and then if things don’t happen
as per his intentions, he will resort to manipulative tantrums
(tragu).
The characteristics of a tragu is where one will create a
commotion like banging his or her head, crying out loud and
resorting to any means possible in order to put others in his or
her own grip. So much so that it scares people into submitting
under the control of the one doing a tragu! With such people,
explaining everything to them and reasoning with them can
achieve a resolution, but otherwise it is best to walk away from
them.
It is an art to do a tragu (manipulative tantrum).
Tremendous energies are wasted in doing one. One incurs
tremendous loss and as a result, risks bypassing the animal
kingdom altogether and takes birth straight in hell.
Dadashri, the Akram Vignani shows us ways to be saved
from manipulative tantrums. He opens up the vision to get
freedom from all kinds of deformed personalities by looking at
them and experiencing them from all the phases; so that we too,
in our own lives can open up and develop that vision and make
ourselves free from our obstinacies (aadayee), adamancy
towards non-communication (risavu), and tragu (manipulative
16

tantrums), or we can escape from people who are obstinate,
upset and non-communicative, or do tragu. Through the
Science of Akram, the Gnani Purush gives us the understanding
of the art and the knowledge to become free from our relative
self and to not get entangled in the relative self of others; this
becomes extremely helpful to remove the obstacles in the path
to our final liberation!
2. Emotional agitation (udvega) : suspicion (shanka) :
intense mental note (nondha)
In order to make others do what one wants, one starts
with obstinacy, then becomes upset and non-communicative and
if he is not successful, he starts to do tragu (manipulative
tantrum). And still if things do not happen according to his
wishes, he develops extreme emotional agitation (udvega). If
the tendency to make others do what one wants is eroded, he
gets freedom from the pain and suffering of emotional agitation
(udvega).
Emotional agitation is created when attachment (moha)
with ego reaches extremes. In a state of extreme emotional
agitation, terrible new karmas are bound.
Only the Gnani Purush can show the subtle clarity of the
speed and force of the prakruti and of emotional agitation! And
it is from the Gnani Purush that the keys to becoming free from
causes that become instrumental in causing emotional agitation
can be easily obtained to tackle the problem.
In order to become free from emotional agitation, one
should find its causes and stay away from them or leave the
issue altogether, no matter how priceless. But one must remove
the root causes of emotional agitation, because as long as there
is slightest emotional agitation, the path to liberation is not there
at all.
In Akram Vignan, one enjoys the freedom as a result of
17

simply ‘seeing’ the relative self (prakruti) that is caught in
emotional agitation. However, because of ignorance he takes it
upon himself by claiming, ‘I am caught in this emotional
agitation.’ And as a consequence he actually becomes trapped!
What causes emotional agitation? It is the intellect
(buddhi). It is the intellect that brings one from vega towards
aavega and ultimately towards udvega, meaning it is the
intellect that takes one from non-consequential motion or a
neutral state (vega), into emotional force (aavega) and ultimately
emotional agitation (udvega) and it is the intellect that gives rise
to suspicions (shanka).
When the power of intellect does not bring about a
solution, one gets puzzled and then suspicions are created.
Suspicion means one has deep ignorance.
In Akram Vignan, in order to save one’s self from the
ravages of suspicion, by understanding the scientific knowledge
of vyavasthit (this is the subtle coming together and functioning
of ‘scientific circumstantial evidences’ in all actions), as given in
the form of Agna (spiritual directives) by the Gnani Purush, one
can remain in a steady suspicion-less state (nihshank).
If suspicion enters into the mind as a result of seeing a
snake entering the house; that suspicion will not go away until
the snake is seen leaving the house. Suspicion will not be born
at all if the knowledge of ‘scientific circumstantial evidence’
(vyavasthit) is understood.
The Vignan (science) that has manifested through the
divine words of the Gnani is the extract of his analysis of his
experiences of countless past lives. The original knowledge of
freedom attained as a result of going through every phase of
numerous innate natures (prakrutis), is the research of the
Gnani Purush!
Many incidents occur in the lives of men, wherein they
18

don’t have any suspicion (they accept their circumstances) about
what is taking place, then why should there be suspicion where
everything is happening as a natural order? In the matter of
digesting food, is there any suspicion whether digestion will
occur or not?
What benefit is there from being laden with suspicion?
The condition of an intensely suspicious person is that of a
corpse even though he may be alive! What happens when there
is suspicion about the daughters when they go off to college?
That suspicion creates constant restlessness. It only creates pain
and hurts one’s own self.
It is a tremendous risk to have suspicion about someone’s
character. How can such a risk be taken? One can remain
suspicion-free as long as he does not happen to see anything.
But does that mean it was not there before? Did it happen
overnight? No. Therefore, if there is suspicion, one should
conciliate that it was there before. This world is only an illusion.
The Soul has no wife and no daughter. Those who don’t want to
miss out on their progress in the path towards their final liberation
should not dwell deeper in any place other than the Soul.
In the effect of Kaliyug, the current bad times, where
morality and sincerity have broken down between husband and
wife, where lies any meaningful pleasure? In Kaliyug, the wife
will not be your own. There are tendencies for sheer deceit and
fraud flowing in this aspect! So, where is the ground for
suspicion? The best way to conduct oneself in this respect is to
take the vow of having only one spouse; otherwise it can only
be called a ‘toilet’, is that not so? The toilet is where everyone
goes!! Is it not true that the insatiable desire and lure for sex
gives rise to suspicion? Once there is freedom from sex,
freedom from suspicion will be there. If one does not become
free from suspicion that arises as a consequence of his sexual
indulgences, not only this life, but his infinite lives to come will
19

be ruined! The one on the path of liberation should be without
suspicion.
Once there is suspicion about a person, there is separation
from that person. The echoes of suspicion will inevitably reach
the other person. Therefore, there should be no suspicion, and
as soon as suspicion occurs, it should be removed with
awareness.
What happens when the daughters go off to college and
parents begin to suspect their character? It only creates
unhappiness! Children try to look for love from outsiders
because they do not receive any at home, and consequently slip.
This can be avoided by living with them as their friends and
having love for them. However, if the daughter takes a wrong
step, can you kick her out of the house? One must give
protection with love and avoid losses! Caution in the beginning
is welcome, but one should never be suspicious!
Where there is no suspicion, there is no unhappiness of
any kind.
To have suspicion is the result of past karma, but to keep
suspicion is not a result of past karma. That will cause worsening
of one’s inner intent.
Suspicion is the greatest weakness; it kills the self.
If someone has suspicion about the Gnani Purush, the
Gnani Purush will know everything and yet behave in a natural
way as if nothing has happened. The Gnani does not have the
slightest separation from the person who is suspicious about him.
His inseparability, his oneness will only make the other person
become free from suspicion.
It is better to slap someone than to suspect him, at least
this way there is an instant solution but to suspect someone will
eat you up day and night all the way to death.
20

Suspicious people can never succeed in any task. Success
selects those who do not harbor suspicion. Suspicion is
removed by remaining in a suspicion-less state, in the state of the
Self.
Does anyone ever become suspicious about death? One
quickly removes any suspicion there.
As long as the Gnani Purush is there to help, all kinds of
suspicions can be resolved completely and thereafter there will
be no obstacles in the path to liberation.
Having suspicion is double the loss. First, there is the
direct suffering and secondly there is a loss (karmic) of seeing
faults in the other person.
Akram Vignan says ‘You’ tell the one (your relative-self)
who harbors suspicion ‘don’t suspect anyone’. The one who
does the telling is separate from the one who has suspicions!
Can one give a car to a driver who has suspicions about
getting into an accident? You should not be in the company of
a suspicion-laden person at all; otherwise he will engulf you in
suspicions too.
Those with suspicion get into trouble, that is the law of
nature and those who do not listen to suspicion have no
difficulties at all.
Why should one be consumed by suspicion in a world
where even what is witnessed with one’s own eyes is proven
wrong?
A single seed of suspicion will grow into an entire jungle!
As we do in Algebra, we should just cross out suspicions.
Finally, one should remove all suspicions by separating one’s
Self from the one (relative-self) who suspects, by employing
Gnan and by scolding and threatening the relative self.
21

When one suspects, suffering occurs right away. But, at
the same time, a new seed is sown that will bring suffering even
in the next life!
Suspicion is removed by doing proper pratikraman. One
has to repent against suspicion. One should not become careless
about it. The one who did the suspecting, the one who was in
violation, should be made the doer of repenting.
After becoming the Self, if the mind shows disorderly
things inside, how can we listen to it? All feelings of attachment
are the qualities of the innate self, they are inanimate qualities,
relative qualities; they are not the qualities of the pure Soul at all.
You are the owner of infinite powers, how can anyone do
anything to You? This fearlessness results in a state that is free
of all suspicion.
It is necessary only to raise awareness against suspicion.
The knower-seer state can only be maintained if there is
awareness and consequently all suspicion is eradicated.
When someone suspects you, it is not unfounded. There
is some fault on your part there. The fault may not have
occurred now; it may be from the past, but only then would this
happen. The world has never been outside the law of nature, not
even for one second.
Only the Gnani Purush can create suspicion over illusory
wrong knowledge (mithya-gnan). And that knowledge will be
gone once there is suspicion about it. There is never any
suspicion about real knowledge.
“Who am I?” One has never suspected or questioned his
real identity or his state of being the owner of the name in any
past lives. That is where one has to have suspicion. If suspicion
is created about one’s own deep-rooted wrong beliefs, it is
called the beginning of realization of the Self.
22

What is the Soul? What is it like? This kind of suspicion
is most difficult to get rid of without the help of a Gnani Purush.
Who is the owner of anger, pride, deceit, and greed? How is
one to understand this? Only the Gnani can make us understand
and help us be rid of them.
What is the Soul? What is it like? Life is to be spent
thinking about this, not in the bedroom or cinema or hotels!!
When do all the different types of suspicions go away?
They go away, when one becomes free from attachments
(vitarag) and free from all fears.
Who has suspicion about the Soul? The Self does not
have suspicions at all. Actually, the ‘relative self’ suspects the
existence of the Self.
He who becomes suspicion-free in the matter of the Soul
is in a state of permanent liberation!
Up until now whatever knowledge one moved around
with, whatever tools of knowledge he utilized, starting from the
time he became suspicious about that knowledge and the tools,
to the point of becoming completely suspicion-less (nihshankta)
regarding the Soul, (the Self), that entire duration of period in
spirituality is regarded as having suspicion with reference to the
Soul. Once that suspicion-less-ness (nihshankta) occurs, one
becomes free of fears (nirbhayta)! And where there is
fearlessness, there is a state of nonattachment (asangata) in the
presence of all attachments!
Akram Vignan is to be applauded in wonder that within
one hour of the miraculous Gnan Vidhi (the one hour spiritual
process of Self-realization), one becomes permanently suspicionfree about the Soul.
Suspicion about the Soul cannot go away by reading
books. A manifest Gnani is required there. As one knows more
23

and more information from the scriptures, his suspicion increases
more and more; once he reaches a stage of ‘I don’t know
anything’, he is ready for real knowledge. The knowledge that
gets rid of kashayas i.e. anger, greed, pride, deceit, is real
knowledge; it is Gnan. Where there is suspicion, there is agony.
The sign of knowing the Soul is a permanent suspicion free state.
To have suspicion is to have an awareness of a kind, ‘Did
I do this or did someone else do it?’ To have such a suspicion
is called higher awareness. ‘I became engrossed (with the
relative-self)’, this suspicion that occurs after Self-realization is
also a form of awareness of knowledge. In the final stage there
prevails, at all times, an awareness of: ‘I never become
tanmayakar (engrossed) at all.’
In Gnani Purush’s state, all the worldly interactions are
done by the pudgal, the relative self and He remains vitarag
(detached). In spite of interacting with the world at every
moment, for Him there is no intense mental note (nondha) of
anything. One’s vision becomes muddy when an intense mental
note (nondha) is made. Always seen in the eyes of the Gnani
Purush is vitaragata, a state of freedom from all attachments.
Where there is true love, there is no intense mental note
(nondha). Where there is no intense mental note, there is a
tension free state!
The worldly love is the love that keeps intense mental
notes, it is known as attraction-fondness (aasakti). Love that
vacillates; love that goes up and down is called infatuation only.
The moment one says ‘This is what you said to me that
day!’ is regarded as keeping an intense mental note and as a
result, one’s love will vanish. By keeping such a note about the
wife who is considered to be your own, will result in turning a
loving life in to a poisonous one.
First comes into one’s conviction (pratiti) the opinion of
24

‘it is wrong to keep an intense mental note’ then it will come into
his experience (anubhav) and then ultimately it will express in
his conduct (charitra). This is the scientific process through
which things express in one’s conduct.
There will be revenge (vair) in the mind if an intense
mental note (nondha) is kept. Half the pain vanishes by not
keeping such a note. Gnani Purush never keeps a note. When
you keep a note, the opposing party will also keep one too.
First begins the taking of a note (nondha), then starts the
mind’s battle, then the battle of words and finally it can end up
in a physical battle. Therefore, it is best to pluck out the root!
The person wanting liberation must get rid of the
‘notebook’. For those who stop taking notes (nondha), their
worldly interactions come to an end.
Those who are certain in the worldly interactions remain
uncertain about liberation. Certainty in the world means supporting
the worldly interactions.
In order to dissolve the innate nature (prakruti) of taking
notes, what does Akram Vignan say? It says that note taking is
done by the innate nature (prakruti) and the real Self has to
simply know that. It is not objectionable that a note is made, but
if the Self’s agreement with taking notes goes away; the note too
will go away.
The habit of ‘taking note nondha’ will not be given up
without the help of the Science (Vignan). The innate worldly
nature will choose to die rather than give up taking intense
mental notes.
How can a note be made of the karmas that are changing;
karmas that are constantly rising and setting?
What is the process of making a note? For whatever
reason, if one has the slightest like or dislike via a nimit (an
25

apparent doer who is simply instrumental in the process), an
intense mental note is made about it. But if no note is made
about the nimit, such inner spiritual effort (purusharth) will lead
one to liberation.
There is always engrossment with the relative self when a
note (nondha) is made. Thereafter it will go under the authority
of the relative self. The Self’s realm and energy will be blocked.
When note is taken, the mind becomes poisonous
towards that person. The one who has stopped taking notes is
considered to have turned to the state of becoming a vitarag.
3. Commonsense : Welding
These days commonsense has been sidelined, proclaims
the Gnani Purush.
“Commonsense means it is everywhere applicable,
theoretical as well as practical.” This definition of commonsense
is quite original and wonderful.
The one with commonsense will open all the locks, no
matter how rusty they are. He does not clash with anyone; he
avoids clashes by using his commonsense at home, outside, in
the workplace and everywhere else. He does not allow
separation due to difference of opinions, with his wife at home.
No matter how intelligent a person may be but if there is
no practicality in him i.e. if there is no commonsense, there will
be clashes.
As one’s ego goes down, his ‘dealing’ will become
proportionately beautiful with everyone.
Commonsense develops by talking about various things
with everyone in an affable way. Commonsense is lessened by
scorn for the worldly life. The one with commonsense is in tune
with everyone.
26

In the worldly life, commonsense is useful to make
decisions and to avoid clashes. A simple man will get cheated
but in return his commonsense will develop.
Commonsense can be effective to the point where one
can allow no ‘depression’ to occur, no matter how many insults
he is subjected to.
Commonsense does not develop when there is selfishness
or plotting because it is used up in the plotting or in deceitful
intents.
If one becomes an expert in any one aspect, his
commonsense becomes obstructed.
The one with commonsense has studied the innate nature
(prakruti) of the other person and that is why he can open any
type of locks.
Commonsense is a type of an insight and insight is a
natural gift. Intellect (buddhi) shows worldly profit and loss. The
direct light of the Soul (pragnya) is born only after achieving the
light of knowledge, Gnan. Commonsense can open up all the
locks in the world but it can’t open a single lock for one’s
salvation (moksha) whereas pragnya will take one to moksha.
To adjust everywhere, one can observe how the Gnani
Purush conducts himself by adjusting everywhere in everyway.
And the one who has learned how to adjust everywhere has
surmounted the world.
It is better to ‘adjust’ rather than complain. If your light is
brighter, dim your light in order to adjust with the person with
the dim light.
The Gnani Purush gives us the key to avoid separation
due to difference of opinion (matbhed) and this key is, ‘We are
all one and there is no difference in us.’ One should repeat this
sentence five times every morning, then one day; a time will
come when you will not have any matbhed with anyone.
27

How can anyone create a wedge in our unity? Those who
do are plotters with deceitful gossip. How can they be allowed
to interfere? How can one afford to be immature and allow
himself to be instigated by others?
One should always do the ‘welding’ (patching up)
whenever a wedge is created with anyone. It is considered a
great quality of virtue to do the ‘welding’ for others, even if there
is suffering and difficulty on the part of the one doing the
welding.
In these times, the one who does the welding i.e. unifies
others, will suffer. After the welding, the two estranged parties
will unite and the welder will be at a loss! After this kind of
suffering the welder backs off. However, the one who wants to
improve for the Self should weld in spite of the suffering!
If one is not comfortable in doing the welding, he should
maintain the intention in his mind of, ‘I want to do the welding’
but he should not have the negative intention of, ‘It is better if
they are separated.’
Those who break up relationships are found everywhere
but those who unite people are rarely to be found.
4. My-ness (mamata): intense insatiable greed (lalacha)
While life is short, how can a single minute be wasted?
You should pass through this world without any ‘dirt’ touching
you. Where there are no expectations of any kind at all, no
blemish of any kind at all, where there is complete purity, there
is the status of the Gnani! The Gnani Purush does not have any
attachment even for his body. The Gnani Purush is without ego
or ‘my-ness’.
Mamata (my-ness) means ‘mine’ and as a result of this
my-ness, ‘I’ has continued to exist. The span of my-ness can
expand from ‘my body’ to ‘my wife, my house, my town, my
country, my world.’ Etc.
28

My-ness should be there with a boundary. The boundary
of my-ness means, it will exist as long as one is alive, for
example the ‘my-ness’ with the body. Any further extension of
my-ness should not be there, including the ‘my-ness’ for an
only son. Otherwise, that extended my-ness will only be
painful.
If an insured ship sinks, how much worrying does the
insurance agent have? If one’s my-ness is of this kind, it will not
cause any pain.
If a bungalow burns down after it is sold and all the
documents are signed, would one feel anything? No; if ‘myness’ can vanish simply by signing papers of agreement, can it
not go away by correct understanding? Otherwise, the bungalow
will say, ‘Boss, either I will go or you will go.’
What are the rules in a museum? You are allowed to see
everything and tour around but you can’t take anything with you.
In the same token, people have to leave everything behind and
go with respect, lying down in a funeral bier! In such a world,
why have all these headaches?
What is indicated by the ‘my-ness’ that causes clashes?
Why is there pain when the wife who is really not your own,
dies? At the time of the marriage ceremony this my-ness
becomes completely binding as the husband begins to think ‘this
is my wife…my wife…my wife...’ Because of this, there is a
psychological effect and the ‘my-ness’ about the wife enters
within. This is what causes pain and freedom from this pain
occurs when the complex knots of ‘my-ness’ are untangled by
saying, ‘not mine…not mine...etc.’
Worldly things are not the impediments to liberation but
my-ness is. The object for which there is my-ness will be the
binding object. In fact, what object belongs to us when in the
end, even the body does not accompany us!
29

The one, who dies without my-ness, attains liberation. The
one with my-ness is not allowed entry in liberation.
To have the knowledge of ‘my-ness is wrong,’ is the
highest earning in life.
Akram Vignan clarifies this all the way, that the one who
has my-ness is not the Self.
‘My-ness’ (mamata) in the one who has attained Selfrealization is ‘dramatic’ my-ness. It is the same my-ness as that
in a drama (the same my-ness an actor has playing his role; it
is perfunctory).
The pleasure that is there when there is no my-ness is the
pleasure of the free mind!
The person who has no intense insatiable greed (lalacha)
in life will find God!
A person with only one type of greed is called greedy.
There is a difference between a lalachu (an intensely greedy
person) and a lobhi (greedy). The greedy has greed in one
aspect only, whereas a lalachu person is greedy in all aspects.
He has an intense insatiable greed to enjoy this way and that
way. For such a person, it is difficult to be free. Intense
insatiable greed makes one lose sight of the goal. He will be
trapped everywhere. The lalachu will self-destruct in every
manner.
The intense insatiable greed arises out of the desire to
enjoy worldly pleasures. With such greed, there is no rule or
law. One will snatch pleasure from here or there, by any means
he can.
Horrible pains are invited by the intense insatiable greed
for sexual pleasure. Disgust towards sexual pleasure will give
freedom from sexuality. As long as there is intense insatiable
greed for any sexual pleasure, clashes will be there. One binds
30

terrible enmity through greed of sexual pleasure. The one who
is intensely greedy for sexual pleasure, will even use intimidation
as a final resort in order to enjoy sexual pleasure.
The intense insatiable greed for sexual pleasure will make
one helpless. So the wife will make him dance like a monkey.
And later, will there not be revenge against each other?
A lalachu person will not only have lalacha for sexual
pleasures but he will also have lalacha for eating, drinking and
traveling; he is lalachu in all things.
It is an inner spiritual endeavor (purusharth) to change
thoughts for intense insatiable greed when they occur. Then, one
is not responsible and if those thoughts are not changed.
A lalachu person, due to being stricken with the intense
insatiable greed, will take all kinds of risks.
A lalachu wants everything. In the same way as a disease
attracts the remedy, all objects of intense insatiable greed are
attracted to the intensely greedy one.
Only those businesses that are in one’s prakruti (innate
nature) can be performed. Out of intense insatiable greed one
gets into imaginary businesses and consequently gets into
trouble.
Why should there be intense insatiable greed (lalacha) for
temporary things? When a decision ‘I don’t want any temporary
thing in this world’ is made, lalacha will go away.
Lalacha is an inborn thing. At the time of death, the seed
of lalacha will carry forward with one and it will grow in the
next life.
If intense insatiable greed (lalacha) is opposed by the
ego, it will go away. But then later, that ego must be washed
away too. Any ailment can be removed in the presence of a
31

Gnani Purush. The other remedy to be free from lalacha is to
stop doing all things that cause it. One must not think about them
and if they come into his thoughts, he should do pratikraman,
and then one day, he may be free from all that tempts him.
The lalachu is a betrayer. He will completely ignore and
bypass the Agnas of the Gnani Purush; therefore the grace of
Gnani Purush will stay away from him. Only if he makes a strong
decision to remain in the Gnani’s Agnas, and becomes very
strong with his mind, body and speech, then there is a possibility
that the intense insatiable greed (lalacha) will leave.
The lalachu can’t give happiness to anyone in the world;
he will give only pain.
The effect of bad company, leads to an intense insatiable
greed creeping within one. The effect of bad company is worse
than poison.
Lalacha does not let Gnan express. It stops at the level
of the intellect only.
At first, one sees his own mistakes, and then the pratiti
(conviction of ‘it is wrong to have these mistakes’) is established.
Once this is firmly established, these mistakes of lalacha can be
rid of by one’s inner spiritual endeavor (purusharth).
The intense insatiable greed to be worshipped will make
one organize groups that will worship him. What is the outcome
of doing this? He will go to hell. To become a guru and enjoy
that status is also the same as having an intense insatiable greed!
This intense insatiable greed is regarded as a terrible disease. If
you want to get rid of this horrible disease that perpetuates the
worldly life, spend one lifetime in subservience to the Gnani
Purush. One should not open up his own ‘shop’ after meeting
the Gnani Purush.
Even God will not question the one who has no greed for
anything at all.
32

5. Pride (maan) : Ego of doer-ship (garva) : Wallowing
in worldly pleasures (garavata)
The Gnani Purush informs us that gnanavarniya karma
i.e. the karma that obstructs the full expression of the knowledge
of the Self, goes once mohaniya karma i.e. the karma that
causes the illusion, is removed. Speaking about himself, The
Gnani Purush asks, ‘What kind of moha (illusion-attachment)
did I have prior to enlightenment?’ He says ‘I did not have any
moha of any kind. I had no inclination for money or sex. The
only thing I did have was pride (maan); great attachment with
pride. However, there was no abhimaan which is pride with
‘my-ness (mamata)’. Abhimaan can only exist if there is myness (mamata). This was pride without any my-ness – this was
maan without mamata.
If from a young age one has been subjected to only
insults, he will have a strong appetite to gain respect. In the same
token if one had nothing but respect given to him in childhood,
the appetite for respect will not be there later on.
When a maani (one with a tuber of pride) gets respect,
his tuber of greed (lobh) will decrease. Whereas a lobhi will not
let go of his tuber of greed; there will be no decrease in his
greed, even when he gets a lot of respect.
From the perspective of liberation, simple pride is
tolerable, but for one to be constantly using his energies in being
preoccupied with, ‘where will I get respect from, how can I get
respect and recognition in the eyes of the world?’ is gravely
dangerous. Pride can be removed but it is extremely difficult to
eradicate the hunger for pride.
If people give you respect, you should enjoy it but do not
become habituated by it. You should be careful not to become
attracted and then attached to the one who gives you respect.
In the process of enjoying respect, awareness of the Self
33

is diminished and if deceit enters into making one wanting
respect, there will be total darkness. There is no objection in
enjoying respect that comes naturally but if it leads to
covetousness for wanting more respect (maan will increase)
then this deformity of pride results in intoxication of pride; that
is objectionable. The very existence of pride makes one ugly,
and then he cannot be attractive. One’s pride persists because
there is an inherent belief in one that others are inferior.
Can the one who loves respect, love insult with the same
intensity? A constant awareness that avoids being insulted is
verily beggary for pride.
Who is the one who receives insults and respects? Is it the
Soul i.e. the real Self? No. This is the affliction of the ego. If you
are the Self, no one can insult you. Does respect or insult have
any connection to the Soul?
In Akram Vignan, You become separate the moment You
say, ‘the one who was insulted is not I’.
If you see the person insulting you as obliging you, then it
will erode the pride within.
In the ignorant state (non-Self-realization state) if the fear
of insult leaves, one becomes shameless and hurtful to others,
whereas if the fear of insult leaves after one receives Gnan, one
becomes completely independent.
There are various phases of pride (maan): Pride with myness (abhimaan), false arrogance (ghamand), hot temper
(tumakhi), head strong (tundmijaji), self-respect (swamaan),
false pride and false my-ness (mithyabhimaan).
When one says, ‘My name is Lalvo’, recognize that he is
only egotistic. There is only ego. (Lalvo is a nickname for Lallu.
Nicknames are typically used for peons.). When he says, ‘I am
Lallubhai’, means that there is also pride along with the ego
34

(with ‘bhai’ there is emphasis on the self – adding ‘bhai’ to a
name is similar to adding the title of ‘Mr.’). ‘I am Lallubhai the
lawyer, did you not recognize me?’ That is ego with rich
materials (ego of showing of his material wealth and
achievements); it is pride with my-ness (abhimaan.) When a
person claims ‘I can beat you’ but he has no strength to do so;
that is called ghamand. If a person does not have a drop of
knowledge nor any money and yet has a lot of arrogance, he is
called a tundmijaji. The one with tumakhi will insult and scorn
respected members of the community! A ghemraji is someone
who has no substance within and without, and yet puts everyone
down. He would say, ‘I can travel around the whole world’
when he is not capable of going even two miles.
Hum is different and ahamkar is different. ‘Hum…hum…I
am everything’ is different, and the ego (ahamkar) is different.
Ego can go away but the ‘Hum’ does not go away easily, it
arises where there is nothing. ‘Hum’ is different from ‘I am
something’!
Ego is the false imposition of the Self, saying ‘I am’ where
the ‘I’ is really not. The ego is present in everyone except in the
Gnani Purush.
Extension of ego is pride (maan). Pride associated with
my-ness (mamata) is abhimaan. To show off, ‘this is my
house…this is my car… is ego with my-ness (abhimaan).
Where there is abhimaan, there is no saiyam; meaning a
state without inner anger, pride, deceit or greed (kashayas);
there is only ignorance there.
The belief of ‘I am Chandulal’ is ego and ‘I am pure Soul’
is the egoless state. After Self-realization, the main ego, the
charging ego that charges new karma is gone but the results of
previous charging which is the discharge ego, still remains.
Absolute knowledge will arise when all the results of this
discharge ego are gone.
35

One must uphold the intention of ‘Let no living being be
hurt through this ego’. Yet, if someone gets hurt one should do
pratikraman for it and move on.
What is the difference between pride (maan) and selfrespect (swamaan)? Pride is ego with my-ness and self-respect
is pride with a boundary, pride for which one is qualified. Selfrespect is engaged in protection of this pride. In the worldly life,
self-respect is a virtue but the one who wants liberation will have
to let go of this self-respect also. To set up protection against
insult is self-respect.
An abhimaani person will exhibit all his possessions but
the person with false pride with my-ness (mithyabhimaani) will
boast ‘we have this and we have that’; when really he has
nothing.
Insult is the ‘thermometer’, i.e. a gauge to measure pride.
When insulted, if one gets affected, that verily shows the
existence of pride.
A nirmaani person i.e. one who claims or holds the belief
within of ‘I am without pride’ will have the ego of, ‘I am without
pride.’ This ego is very subtle. Such ego too will have to go if
he wants liberation.
The Gnani Purush is with and without inclination (spruha).
He is completely disinclined towards the non-self of others
(nispruha) and completely inclined (saspruha) towards the
Souls of others.
There is no unmattata (reaction of swelling with pride) in
the Gnani Purush. People swell with pride when they have
money in their pockets and in the Gnani, there is no such
reaction even when he is surrounded with luxury.
The Gnani Purush does not have any ‘I-ness’ (potapanu).
He is not the owner of the mind, speech or body at all.
36

The Gnani Purush has no ego of doer-ship (garva). ‘I am
doing this’ or ‘I have done that’ is all ego of doer-ship. There
is no doer-ship in the state of the real Self. Garva-ras is ‘juice’
of doer-ship; it is very sweet. The instant one feels ‘I did it’, he
tastes the sweetness of the ego of doer-ship. It is also, tasting
the ego of doer-ship if one maintains from within ‘It happened
because I was there’. In this world, there is nothing sweeter than
the taste of the ego of doer-ship.
How does the taste of the ego of doer-ship go away? It
goes away by knowing the science (Vignan). Which science? To
know, ‘Who is doing all this?’ This science will make you know
that you are not the doer. After that the taste of the ego of doership of ‘I am doing’ is not there. The Gnani Purush does not
have ‘I did’ with any of his actions.
The intoxication of ‘I know’ is a terrible danger! That
disease will never go away without the Gnani’s help. It is more
dangerous than poison. If you want to have an ego, have the ego
of, ‘I don’t know anything.’
When people praise you and you are in an intoxicated
state for the whole day; that is called praise intoxication. And
garavata is, ‘I did such a great job!’ Doer-ship as in ‘I am the
doer’ creates the habit of further tasting the ego of doer-ship.
What should one do to not taste the ego of doer-ship?
Nothing is to be done. The awareness of, ‘I am the Self,’
separates one from, ‘I am the doer,’ and the taste of doer-ship.
The one who has acquired Self-realization simply needs to know
‘I am not the one tasting the ego of doer-ship’; he simply needs
to maintain that awareness.
There is no wallowing in worldly pleasures (garavata) in
the Gnani Purush. The garavata of human beings is like a
buffalo sitting in the comfort of cool wet mud on a hot summer
day. Nothing would make it budge. Similarly, those who are
37

engrossed in worldly pleasures such as success, achievements
and prosperity, or for that matter the knowledge of scriptures –
they are all in garavata and it will not let them come out of the
worldly life. They are stuck there and they make no spiritual
progress. Only the compassion of the Gnani Purush can bring
them out of it.
With explanation and later through Gnan (Self-Realization)
given by the Gnani Purush, one understands that there is no real
happiness in the worldly life and gets the conviction (pratiti) that
real happiness lies only in the Self. Once there is a firm decision
on his part, it will help get rid of garavata. Akram Vignan says
that the one who is experiencing garavata, is not the real Self.
Garavata gradually dissolves away with this awareness.
The Gnani Purush has no doer-ship (garva), no pleasure
indulgence (garavata), no inner or outer inclination (spruha),
no swelling with pride (unmattata), no ‘I-ness’ (potapanu).
Surrendering to such a One, who is in a magnificent state of
Gnan, a seeker’s (spiritual) losses of infinite past lives are
recouped in just one lifetime and he attains the guarantee of
liberation (moksha).
6. Laghutam : Gurutam
The state of the Gnani Purush is such, that in matters of
worldly interactions (vyavahar) he is laghutam i.e. he is the
smallest; the lowliest and in matters of the Soul, the real Self
(nischaya), he is gurutam, the highest. The Gnani Purush is
never the guru of anyone. He is not anyone’s superior and no
one is his superior, not even God. Even God is pleased with the
one who has no ego and ‘my-ness’.
The one who becomes the most ‘junior’ in the world will
be the most ‘senior’ in the whole universe.
In mathematics, the smallest and the final indivisible
amount is the lowest common multiple. From this definition, in
38

His childhood, Dadashri discovered God; God is the smallest in
all living beings (laghutam) and common in all. Since that time,
his inclination towards becoming laghutam in worldly interactions
led him in becoming laghutam in the worldly life, while
simultaneously there manifested the state of absolute gurutam
as the Self.
Being laghutam (lowest; smallest) bestows one with
permanent security. The laghutam has no fear of falling.
In the world, everyone likes to be gurutam (biggest,
highest) not laghutam (the smallest; lowest). The one who tries
to become gurutam will wander around in the world of the four
life forms and the one who becomes the smallest will soon go
towards final liberation.
What does Akram Vignan say? It says for one to be the
smallest in the relative world and biggest in the real and neither
big nor small (aguru-laghu) in the Self-form! The one who is
the smallest in the relative world, by law, becomes the biggest
in the real! In that stage, God will embrace that person.
One should not become the world’s guru but should make
the world his guru. A guru without the ‘guru-key’ (gurukilli)
becomes very heavy. He will drown himself and will drown
those who follow him. The guru-key must be obtained from the
Gnani Purush. Guru-key means a constant awareness of ‘I am
a disciple of all disciples; I am the smallest.’
Everyone needs a guru that fits his or her level of spiritual
development. Kindergarten teachers, first standard or second
standard teachers, college teacher and the ultimate teacher is the
one who makes the whole world his teacher; the ultimate guru
is the one who makes the whole world his guru.
Until one’s intention of becoming the biggest in the world
is gone, unless ones inner belief of ‘I am something’ is gone, the
intention to be the smallest cannot take hold.
39

It is very difficult to achieve the status of the smallest. It
is achieved by the one who has a constant awareness about the
line of demarcation between the real and the relative with the
help of Gnani Purush. He who remains within the Agnas
(spiritual directives) of the Gnani Purush can attain the status of
the smallest; his vision is towards the state of laghutam and the
goal is of only that, so he will become that.
What is the characteristic of being the smallest? One
should know that he has become the smallest when if he is sitting
in the car and is asked to get out of the car, is called back to
sit in the car, asked to get out again; if this happens nine times
over and each time he is not affected, then that is the sign of
becoming laghutam.
‘To remain in the intent of becoming the smallest; to have
laghutam bhaav and to keep the vision of oneness (abheda
drashti) is the foundation of Akram Vignan.’
~Dadashri
The worldly life has been created from the ego of being
the biggest, and with the ego of becoming the smallest it comes
to an end.
The race in the race-course starts when one enters the
race to become number one. In the intent to come last, there is
no race.
While running the race to become number one, everyone
dies panting while the prize is awarded only to one.
Criticism (teeka) and competitiveness (spardha) are
some of the manifestation of the ego. Everyone is undergoing the
effects of their own karma, how can anyone be criticized? To
criticize means to ruin your own self.
The one with the ego of having skills and the know-how
will get exhausted in this worldly race. Instead, one can sit on
40

the side, enjoy and take it easy by saying, ‘I have no skills’. The
Gnani Purush clearly says ‘I don’t even know how to shave,
even at this age!’
The one with the ego of having skills doesn’t know that
his mistakes are buried under the nature’s ‘factor of safety’ and
he believes, ‘I am so skillful.’
People will keep on doing work as long as there is the
ego of being skillful. What is to be done by those without skills?
The knowledge of skill has continued on the basis of ego. How
can the skill continue where there is no ego or where the ego has
ended?
The Gnani Purush repeatedly reiterates that He has no
skills but people do not believe it. People say ‘Dada knows
everything’. Then, He says, ‘I know about the Self. I know that
the ‘Soul’ is the knower-seer. Whatever the ‘Soul’ can ‘see’, ‘I’
can ‘see’. I do not know anything else.’
When the other person insists (khench), the Gnani lets go
slowly and leaves and moves ahead. If someone insists, and you
insist in return, it will hinder your progress. The other person
insists according to what he ‘sees’, therefore, where is he at
fault?
The one who wants to attain final liberation, the world will
call him crazy; the world will beat him up and throw him out.
Yet, he should accept defeat and sit down. The way of the
Gnanis is to win the world by letting others win! Therefore, in
this world, it is worth learning how to be defeated. Only then,
he can be free from this world. Otherwise, he who is trying to
win is considered as defeated. This research of the Gnani is
worth adopting.
Gnani Purush Himself has become abuddha (intellectfree; without any use of intellect), whereas the world is trying to
become intelligent or making attempts to be called intelligent!
41

One can be an expert in one subject at the most. Instead
to be ‘ignorant in everything’ is best. When one becomes
ignorant in everything his life will run smoothly. Because you can
hire experts in everything; you can hire a lawyer, a doctor, an
accountant, a solicitor, even a manager to run the factory is
available for hire!
Once you say, ‘I don’t have any skills’; you are freed
from the race-course. Instead of others calling us unskilled, why
not say it ourselves and become free from this world?
What is the outcome of running in a horse race? Today
you may be first, but at some time or other you may also be last.
So you should refuse even if God were to tempt you to run in
a horse race!
Your personality will shine once you have moved away
from the horse race. Horse race (competitiveness) and personality
cannot exist side by side.
Once the short and sweet course of Akram Vignan is
completed, your debt of infinite lifetimes is paid off in one
lifetime. Then, there is fearlessness (nirbhayta), non-association
(asangata) and non-attachment (vitaragata).
7. Insistence (khench) : deceit (kapat) : point-man (the
one who leads you astray)
Akram Vignan is the science of Gnani Purush’s experiences
that is capable of solving all kinds of worldly or spiritual puzzles.
How should life be for the one who has attained Akram
Vignan? Life should be without any insistence. When you make
a true statement but no one accepts it, there should not be a
need to prove it. And if insistence arises, on account of the
effect of your baggage of previous karma, then by simply
‘seeing’ it, You will become free from it.
In the path of liberation, there is no law. Whatever
42

happens naturally is correct! No law-law! Otherwise, while
making a law, a whole mountain of laws will have to be created.
Where there is law, there is no naturalness. Liberation is for the
one who becomes natural (sahaj).
To start rivalry is like falling from your own position. If
you are true but hold on to the truth; that too is considered as
ego. The world’s truth is not the absolute truth; it is a relative
truth. Why should you hold on to it? The Gnani Purush is
completely without insistence.
Know that you are on the correct path if you become the
one without any separation due to differences of opinion
(matbhed); there should be no hold or insistence anywhere. He
who bends to any shape is called straightforward (sarad).
Of all the kashayas of anger, greed, pride, and deceit that
obstruct right knowledge and behavior, deceit (kapat) is the
toughest. This is because deceit has a sweet face and can’t be
seen. All kinds of accounts of karma are created due to deceit
(kapat). Deceit verily means that the owner (the one having
deceit) is unaware of its existence and its operation and for that
reason it is difficult to remove it.
To gain advantage in worldly life by pulling others towards
your opinion and taking them into your confidence is called
deceit (kapat). The person being deceitful does not know or is
not aware of his deceitfulness. The constant awareness of
‘Except for liberation, I don’t want anything at all,’ will make
deceit leave. Saying this five times every morning will let the
awareness arise to defeat deceit.
Due to deceit (kapat) that exists and to finish the game of
deceit, a person will win over others by employing craftiness
(chaturai). The one who understands what is good for him and
what is bad will not enter into this trap of craftiness.
By repeatedly and deeply keeping the intention ‘I want to
43

get rid of all my faults, I want to attain final liberation (moksha)
only,’ one can be free from deceit.
As long as any sweetness is experienced in worldly
interaction, the uninterrupted awareness as the Self cannot
prevail. Bitterness is not objectionable. With sweetness there will
be interruptions and dozing in the awareness of the Self.
Having met the Gnani Purush, one’s train for liberation is
on the main line to the final destination of liberation. But, if some
‘point-man’ comes across on the way, there is no guarantee of
staying on course. The whole track may change! The ‘pointman’ talks in such a way, that you will not even know that the
track has been switched.
The seeker will realize that the track changed when the
Gnani Purush alerts him. Then, analyzing minutely, he will
recognize where the change started, what happened, who did it,
on what ground it happened and which intense insatiable greed
(lalacha) within led to this, and when easiness (nirakudata) left
and when did uneasiness (akudata) set in. All this has to be
known in the awareness (jagruti). The one whose worldly
interaction (vyavahar) becomes unsteady, will become shaky in
the Self (nischaya).
Progress is made when one is not swayed by anything that
has no relation with the goal of liberation. This prevents the
switching of the ‘tracks’, and ensures spiritual progress. Stick to
only the talk that liberates. Any talk that sways from this goal
and the right vision should not be allowed to enter the mind. The
Gnani is not so guileless (bhoda). He will not be distracted if
someone were to try to change the track.
Where there is deceit (kapat), there is guilelessness
(bhodpan). Believing anything negative about anyone to be true
is guilelessness. The remedy for this is to listen dramatically (to
pretend to listen earnestly while really listening only superficially),
44

not to object to it and to rely only upon the right vision.
Everyone will speak according to what they understand but you
should rely only on the right vision.
No matter what worldly obstructions may arise in the path
of liberation, Akram Vignan is such and its path is such that one
can surmount all of them. If one says, ‘it is difficult…it is
difficult,’ then it will become difficult for him.
‘Why should I care?’ is one statement that should not be
uttered by anyone. Saying this creates separation. Where ‘what
do I care, what is it to me?’ exists, one should do pratikraman
and turn it around. The one who says, ‘What do I care?’ has
become (nispruha), rejecting attitude. This is a grave danger for
the Self.
One has to ensure; be continuously aware that the path to
final liberation is not missed.
The path to final liberation is missed if one asks, ‘what
were they saying about me when I was gone?’ Let people say
whatever they want to about you. Such questions come up only
if one has deceit (kapat). To engage in such a practice is to hide
the Self.
It is considered a grave disease to eavesdrop in order to
catch something being said about you. The world will talk if you
are at fault, so why should there be any objection? If anyone
speaks negatively about you, let him, it is of benefit to You. You
need to remain strong. Even a small mistake in this matter can
create terrible problems. The deceit in you leads the mind to
secretly listen in on other people’s conversation.
If you happen to listen to what others are saying about
you, it will disrupt your sanity. The one talking might have said
it casually without much thought, but look how it ruins your mind
and sleep.
45

Some people say that they employ deceit and deception
out of fear, but fear of what? The one with the fault will have
fear, is that not so?
He who has the intense burning desire and craving for
liberation will not be touched by any hindrances in the path of
liberation.
‘I know’ is the biggest hindrance in the path of liberation!
It causes death of the Self. ‘I know’ brings on intoxication that
is very difficult to remove! The face of the one without the
intoxication of ‘I know’ is attractive. The rising of the belief of
‘I know’ after Gnan is tremendous lack of awareness.
If one attempts to solve problems with the attitude of ‘I
know’, it will only complicate matters further.
If sweetness prevails in ‘I know’, it will sprout. There, one
should erase it quickly, as soon as it sprouts, pluck it out.
Otherwise, this ailment will grow and it will ruin the awareness
of the Self.
All the danger signals in the path to liberation should be
known from the Gnani Purush. Then only, will the safe-side be
maintained. Otherwise, there is no telling where the ‘ship’ will
end up.
The law is: the one who wants to attain only liberation will
always find the correct path.
8. Awareness (jagruti) : Desire to be worshipped
(poojavani kaamna)
By matching our understanding with the Gnani’s
understanding, we walk parallel to Him. If we don’t, there is no
telling when the path to liberation will change direction. On the
path to final liberation, not a single degree of an individual’s own
understanding will work. One has been wandering around life
after life because he has not attained the right understanding.
46

The answer to a seeker’s question can only be given to
his satisfaction and full resolution, if the ego of the one answering
the questions is completely gone. Even the discharge ego has to
leave completely. The speech that accepts all viewpoints and
does not hurt anyone to the slightest extent will not come forth
as long as one tastes the sweet juice of doer-ship (garvaras).
Thus, there should not be any ego or intellect in the speech that
comes forth. People will not get any benefit if the ego of the one
trying to preach is not gone. It will feel good to the listener’s ear,
so he will praise the preacher but it will cause a terrible loss to
the preacher. The ego will take all the credit and divert him from
the path of liberation.
In the path of Akram Vignan the Gnani Purush shows the
‘red light’ (danger signal) to those who want to be preachers
(updeshak). Dadashri gives this ‘red signal’: ‘If as much as a
hair of ‘our’ knowledge is told to people, people will flock;
people have not seen such bliss, they have not heard anything
like this, therefore, they will flock here! But the ego that is sitting
inside will laugh.’ If you want to achieve completion (the
absolute state of the Soul), don’t show your immaturity by
answering when anyone asks questions.
The fire is covered under the ashes. As long as the
intellect has not been eradicated, as long as the ego has not been
eradicated, as long as worldly desires are not eradicated and as
long as there are thoughts of sexual pleasure (vishaya), there is
no predicting when that fire will ignite. Unless the kashayas and
vishaya that have been covered up are eradicated, preaching to
people is very dangerous and risky.
One will not be able to find his mistakes as long as one
is partial to his own self. Partiality towards the relative self will
keep one in illusion and perpetuate the illusion. When the force
of karma unfolds, one becomes absorbed in it, the awareness
(jagruti) is blocked and the application of knowledge (upayog)
47

is missed. There, the awareness will be regained if one remains
in the satsang of the Gnani Purush.
Awareness (jagruti) is a different matter and Gnan
(experiential knowledge as the Self), is a different matter. To
awaken from sleep is called awareness. In awareness, kashayas
are dormant but when kashayas are annihilated, it is called
Gnan, anubhav. As the awareness increases, pending karmas
do not remain and there occurs complete purity within.
As long as there is deceit for pride within, it will not allow
awareness to surface. Deceit means to hide and to cover up and
it always takes one on the wrong path. Deceit and ego that
supports anger, pride, illusion and greed will take you on the
wrong path.
When deceit in any form does not remain, when no
thoughts of passion for sensual pleasures remains, and when the
kashayas are eradicated, then the awareness that arises will
result in ‘knowledge’ (gnan).
When one moves away from the shelter of the Gnani
Purush, kashayas will invade with all their family members.
These kashayas will try by any means to make one leave the
shelter of the Gnani Purush. If a slightest of sweetness is tasted,
the kashayas get their nourishment. If the kashayas are not
given any food at all, they will come to extinction. But they
become strong if they are fed!
The status of Gnani is achieved when there comes a level
of awareness that not a single kashaya ever gets any feeding;
such awareness is needed. Kashayas can be won over only if
one is subservient (aadhin) to the Gnani and remains under His
shelter and never leaves it.
Unless the Gnani Purush certifies you, don’t even attempt
to preach. All the faults within you are ready and waiting to
attack at a moments notice. When all the kashayas are
48

eradicated, such a stage (of becoming certified) arrives by itself!
Awareness is the state where the ‘thief of kashaya’ is not
allowed to enter. In such awareness, one can see all his faults
and his ego. This ego is definitely there and it makes one taste
the sweet juice of doer-ship (garvaras). When someone says,
‘you did well’, he tastes the sweetness of doer-ship right away.
This will cause his fall later on! Gnan exists where there is no
difference between bitter or sweet.
In satsang, explanations to anyone’s questions should not
be given by anyone other than the Gnani Purush. Only simple
and natural talks are allowed, but the slightest weight given to
the relative self, will give rise to the poison that will kill the Self.
The kashayas that are lying dormant are eradicated by
the increasing awareness. The one in whom awareness has
taken hold, should take advantage of the awareness by doing
samayik and pratikraman, meaning introspective meditation and
repentance respectively, to annihilate the faults.
There is great fun in walking behind Dada as His child.
Dada will pick you up if you become Dada’s child whereas, if
your ego expresses like a grown up, then you have to walk by
your self and wander around aimlessly! Then after taking a
beating, you will turn around.
The intense greed and desire to be worshipped is a
terrible disease, it is suicidal; someone will bow to you and then
it will become a habit.
The Soul (Self) is already revered by all and one is trying
to get his body worshipped, which is going to become ashes one
day! Liberation is prevented because of this disease.
When one creates a path that is slightly independent from
the Gnani’s, he enters into a terrible maze. Once you have been
told that you should follow the Gnani, how can you afford to
49

have a diversion? How can you take such a risk? In the end, it
will cause a terrible fall!
Whatever comes across as hindrance in the path to
liberation should be quickly plucked and thrown out. Then only
can one stay focused on the goal. If the goal is set for liberation
but the intentions are impure, one will lose the goal. That which
makes one lose the goal is the enemy.
When one wants liberation, he has to become so strong
and make a decision that ‘come what may, whatever may
become of this body, let it be, but I will not forsake the path of
liberation. I want to accomplish my goal’, and for such a one the
work, the goal will be accomplished. Only this intent and a firm
decision have to be made.
After knowing from the Gnani Purush these dangerous
chasms that exist on the way to liberation, one has to be in a
constantly cautious state about them. It is worth being free from
the faults by expressing them directly to the Gnani and by turning
away from them. Do not attempt to gain any recognition or
worship in the path to liberation. The goal of salvation for the
world cannot be harbored with any intent or sense of doer-ship
and there is no place for ego in it. One has to walk in the path
of liberation without being recognized. One must not give up
Gnani Purush’s Satsang or the Gnani’s shelter all the way to the
final liberation.
One should not see the faults of the Gnani Purush; he
should not find mistakes in the Gnani Purush. If nine of the
Gnani’s statements are understood and one statement is not, that
one statement should be put aside and one should ‘wait and
watch’. It will be understood later.
9. ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) : The Supreme Soul (parmatma)
The Gnani Purush has oneness (abhedta) with the whole
world; he has no separation from anyone. Separation will be
50

there only if the Gnani Purush had buddhi (intellect)! He who is
without buddhi (intellect) has oneness with the universe.
Oneness increases the experience of Gnan and separation
scatters all the energies. When ‘I-ness’ is gone the separation is
gone and there is oneness with everyone.
This A. M. Patel has given up all His ‘I-ness’ and has
offered it to the Lord. Know that the one whose ‘I-ness’ is gone
has achieved oneness with God.
‘I-ness’ is completely gone from the Gnani Purush. He
behaves completely according to the circumstances and without
ego. Like a ‘bundle’, He goes everywhere He has to go! One
can remain in his natural state when ‘I-ness’ is gone. He does
not have any opinion of his own at all! Yet, His life’s interactions
are ideal. He remains ‘dramatic’ (superficial) all the time. One
can only remain dramatic if his ‘I-ness’ is gone.
It is ‘I-ness’ to protect the relative self. To protect the
relative self in a deceitful way is known as gaaddha potapanu
(severely deep rooted ‘I-ness’).
What is the test to check whether the ‘I-ness’ is gone? If
there is no change in the facial expression or within, even after
one is asked to get in and out of a car nine times over, then his
‘I-ness’ is gone. The knowledge of scientific circumstantial
evidence (vyavasthit) frees one from ‘I-ness’ (potapanu).
Except for the Gnani Purush, everyone has ‘I-ness’.
When the ‘I-ness’ is gone, one becomes God!
Once ‘I-ness’ is gone; it is gone forever.
After receiving Gnan, the ego that charges karma is gone
but the discharge ego still remains and that discharge ego is
known as ‘I-ness’. When the entire discharge ego is gone, one
is said to be free from potapanu.
51

‘I-ness’ is decreased in proportion to the level of
awareness. What kind of awareness is required to get rid of ‘Iness’? The awareness of, ‘This is ‘I’ (the real Self) and this is
not I’, a constant awareness of the Self, following the Agnas of
the Gnani Purush and seeing others as faultless and as nondoers; all these are required.
No matter what the result is, saying ‘I am not this’ makes
one free.
Where ‘I-ness’ is gone; there is no ego of doer-ship, and
no wallowing in worldly pleasures (garavata).
To favor the side of the ego, to favor the side of
ignorance, to step away from the Self; is called ‘I-ness’
(potapanu).
Not to become absorbed (tanmayakar) in the scientific
circumstantial evidence is purusharth (Self oriented effort).
Pragnya, which is the force of the Soul, prevents this
absorption process in the unfolding scientific circumstantial
evidence of the non-self, whereas agnya i.e. the intellect will
make one get absorbed in the unfolding scientific circumstantial
evidence.
Everyone has ‘I-ness’ in the unfolding karma. After
attaining Gnan, as one employs purusharth in the unfolding
karma, the ‘I-ness’ decreases and gradually vanishes.
The one who can recognize and see the departure of ‘Iness’ in the Gnani Purush, is eternally blessed and graced.
With the departure of ‘I-ness’ (aapopu), one becomes
the supreme Self (parmatma). Thereafter, scientific circumstantial
evidence will take care of Him.
Jai Sat Chit Anand

52

Contents
[1] Obstinacy (aadayee) : Sulking (risavu) :
Manipulative tantrums (tragu)
The Gnani Purush’s words are worth understanding
1
Will you not have to become straight?
2
If you admit to be being obstinate, you will defeat the obstinacy. 3
Obstinacy: Common and Uncommon
4
Obstinacy in men and women
4
You have to see your own obstinacy
5
When obstinacy leaves…
6
Obstinacy is the only obstacle
7
Nature of obstinacy
8
Becoming straight through understanding
9
Necessities for progress along the path of moksha
10
Obstinacy during the early years of Ambalal Patel....
13
The ego is the basis
16
Never say, ‘I cannot do it’
17
The knowledge guides one’s conduct
18
Everyone’s obstinacy is different
18
Those obstinacies will end
19
Straight and yet there were subtle obstinacies
19
In those situations you should be alert
20
Only a Gnani can straighten him out
21
The Gnani is pleased with the one who becomes sarad 21
A Dramatic ego!
22
Obstinacy leaves by ‘knowing’ that it has occurred
23
It should not be so
25
‘You’ are not the obstinate ‘one’
26
This Akram Vignan is like that
27
If you become upset and noncompliant, you will miss..... 28
Who is the loser?
30
53

Thereafter he never became upset and non-communicative 32
Only the ‘one’ who reacts sees the one who.....
33
The unique method of vitaragata (the state of non-attachment) 34
Vitarag and yet meddlesome
36
That is called tragu - manipulative tantrum
37
That is not a tragu - manipulative tantrum
38
Keep your distance from manipulative tantrum (tragu)
38
Consequences of a tragu
40
In opposing the one doing a tragu (manipulative tantrum) 40
That is shameless open blackmail (naagai)
43
Dealing with taipho
43
Tragu for salvation of the world
44
Tragu, is an art too
49
Vigilance with understanding
50
Tragu became a heavy liability for a lady
51
Ingrained in the prakruti
51
Beware of those doing tragu!
52
Adjustment to save yourself
54
[2] Udvega (emotional agitation) : Shanka (suspicion) :
Nondha (making a deep intense mental note)
Against emotional agitation: udvega
56
Where there is no expectation, there is no emotional agitation 57
Motion (Vega), emotion (Aavega) and emotional.....
58
Udvega - so many difficulties
60
Move away from that aspect of your relationship.....
62
Intellect is what brings on udvega
60
The ‘one’ who experiences udvega, is not the Self
64
The root of suspicion (shanka)
66
Suspicion is constant death
67
Suspicion and inquisitiveness
68
For devotees...
69
54

Keep a medicine for suspicions
70
It all depends on the sub-atomic particles (parmanus)
71
Does suspicion result in prejudice?
72
Solution for suspicion
73
Passing through every phase
76
The ‘one’ who is beyond worldly interactions, ‘settles’ it 77
Suspicion leads to destruction
77
The one who is suspicion-laden is a living dead
77
Why have suspicions where everything happens automatically? 78
Suspicion is harmful at all times
79
The dangers are grave
80
How much strain should you put on your eyes in the dark?81
For those going to moksha
83
‘Safe-side’ related marital conduct
84
What a betrayal this is
85
How can there be moha (attachment due to illusion)..... 86
Solution for situations of extreme suspicion
87
That is a dangerous disease
88
Effects of suspicions
88
Intellect ruins the worldly life
89
Suspicion, continued suspicion and destructive suspicion 90
The unawareness of moha (illusionary attachment)
92
Unconstructive criticism
92
Beware! Parents of daughters
93
Suspicion? No, take care of her
95
Free from kashayas on the path of moksha
96
Solution for suspicions
98
Vyavasthit eliminates suspicion
98
If you want to go to moksha...
100
It is your own weakness
102
Dada listens to suspicions through the magic of Gnan
102
No separation between him and us, even when reprimanding104
55

Instead of being suspicious...
Even if it is true do not harbor suspicion
Suspicion even after entrusting someone?
When you remember what you loaned
Suspicion and astrology
Nihshankta: total absence of suspicion
No one will have suspicions of this kind
Solution from the Gnani Purush
Then have suspicion all the way to the end
…otherwise do not harbor suspicions
Be cautious but not suspicious
Never have suspicions, even when knowing everything
The ‘doer’ and the ‘sayer’ are separate
Fearlessness is required there
Precaution is taken by the worldly self, not.....
From a seed to a jungle
A suspicion-laden mind is separate and ‘You’ are separate
Purity through pratikraman
Suspicion that never goes away charges new karma
The non-Self was and is separate from the Self
Awareness of Gnan against suspicion
Opposing suspicion about the other person
The world remains suspicion less where suspicion is needed
Doubt over wrong knowledge
Doubt only over the ego
Suspicion-free about ‘I am Chandulal’ for....
Suspicion-free in regards to the Soul
One cannot waste this precious human life this way
That is when suspicions and uncertainties go away
Who has suspicion about the Atma?
Pragnya (the direct light of the Self) is biased only.....
Nihshankta (suspicion-less-ness): Nirbhayta.....
56

106
107
107
107
109
109
111
111
112
114
114
115
116
117
119
121
127
128
129
130
131
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
143
144

This is what happens in the Gnan Vidhi
145
The Science of Separation through Akram
147
Then there is no liability
148
Suspicion does not depart through reading books
149
Knowing causes suspicion
150
After Gnan, there is no one left to suspect
153
Gnan shows its presence, where such a suspicion arises 154
Suspicion-free as to the purity of the Self
155
Where is the basis for suspicion?
157
Dealings are of the pudgal (the relative-Self) and.....
158
Where there is love, there is no nondha.....
159
Destroy mistakes scientifically
162
Making intense mental notes increases enmity
163
Vyavasthit eliminates intense mental notes
164
Being exact in worldly life will impede your liberation
165
Intense mental notes perpetuates the worldly life
166
Intense mental note taker is not You: Do not agree with him 168
‘We’ are separate from the one making the note
169
Why keep a note of changing karmas?
170
The likes and dislikes make one take nondha
172
Authority to give opinion?
172
The authority of the non-Self reigns where there is nondha173
Intense mental notes and opinion
174
You need awareness, not an intense mental note
176
Where there is an intense mental note there is the sting 176
Absolute darshan of The Gnani
177
Along the path of the vitarag...
178

[3] Commonsense : Welding
Deficiency in commonsense
‘Everywhere applicable’

179
179
57

The Yard stick of commonsense
Lack of practical understanding
Your worldly interactions are at their best when.....
Commonsense increases with a mixing nature.....
‘Singing’ in harmony is the key
Commonsense avoids conflicts
How to stop swachhand (to act according to one’s.....)
Straightness increases commonsense
Solution with commonsense
Selfishness prevents full commonsense
Insight (sooj) is a different thing altogether
Selflessness leads to full commonsense
Buddhi (intellect), Sooj (insight) and Pragnya.....
Only one key to open all the locks
Learn only this in the worldly life
Complaint? No just adjust!
Coming down to the level of others
This is how you attain oneness
Do not encourage negative talk by listening to others
‘Welding’: Settling disputes and reuniting
To the Welder...
Do not let your bhaav turn into abhaav
Insight of welding from the beginning
Welding is an art!
Happiness everywhere with welding
Gnani’s original talk
Everyone breaks but rare is the One who patches up

181
182
182
183
184
185
185
186
187
187
188
189
194
195
196
196
197
198
198
200
201
202
203
204
206
207
207

[4] Mamata (Attachment – my-ness) :
Lalacha (Covetousness)
Better to stay away from sticky wet mud
The Gnani is without any expectations
58

208
208

Not even a hint of mamata (attachment; ‘my-ness’)
Where there is no ‘my-ness’ there exists the supreme Self
The nature of mamata
The extent of mamata (my-ness)
The boundary of mamata (my-ness)
Mamata of the Insurance Agent
You can have mamata for this body only
Remove mamata through understanding
The rules in a museum
Saying, ‘mine’ makes it stick; saying ‘not mine’ makes it leave
Achieve everything even without mamata
Entrapment is the consequence of greed (lalacha)
Subtle observation of one’s own nature
Belief that creates mamata (my-ness)
The one with mamata is not the Self
Mamata (my-ness) such as the one in a drama
Enjoying without my-ness
He attains liberation
One loses all sense in intense inner greed (lalacha)
Gluttonous greed for pleasure makes one miss the....
Which is harmful, lobh (greed) or lalacha.....
The craving for pleasure from every which way
Lalacha for sex, what a demeaning state
Conflicts because of it
From intense greed (lalacha) to helplessness and.....
The touch of a lalachu person will ruin samskar...
That is purusharth
Covetous people take on a liability
A covetous person is always seeking pleasure
Why has intense greed (lalacha) for this?
Swachhand (intense inner impediment of doing things.....
59

209
210
211
212
213
214
215
217
218
221
223
223
224
224
225
226
227
227
228
229
231
235
237
239
241
241
241
243
243
244
244

The tubers of intense greed (lalacha)
Such resolution can make you free from lalacha
Removing lalacha through the ego
That is when intense greed (lalacha) goes away
A person hurts others because of his intense greed (lalacha)
Make sure you do not abuse it in this way
Effect of bad company
Veils over lalacha are very heavy
The ultimate solution is to follow Agnas
Intense greed (lalacha) for wanting reverence
Live one life by surrendering to the Gnani
Life surrender to gnan
Your intention should be for the absolute state
It is not found in scriptures, it has not even been heard...

245
246
247
248
248
249
250
250
251
258
260
261
262
263

[5] Maan : Garva : Garavata
Maan without mamata: pride without ‘my-ness’
The pride was a belief only in the mind
It was all for maan
Frightful heat of anger in reaction to obstruction of pride
The Ego before and after Gnan
Ego of a noble man
Craving for respect
‘Tasting’ respect releases one from having greed for it
The beggary for respect
Enjoy the respect people give you but...
Deceit in pride: Distortion of pride
Distortion of pride: Intoxication of ego
You should be indebted to the one insulting you
Love for insults
Education and wisdom
Pratikraman for the attack
60

265
266
268
270
270
272
274
275
276
277
278
278
279
280
281
281

The fear of being insulted is beggary (bheekh) of pride
The Soul and respect or insult
How can anyone insult You when he does not.....
Maya: the illusion and her progeny of six sons
The growing pride gives rise to greed
Pride, verily is himsak-bhaav
There are countless phases of pride
‘Hum’ (‘I-ness’ with ego) is an obstacle on the path.....
Ego, pride and pride with ‘my-ness’
The zero state of the Gnani Purush
After Self-realization...
Swamaan and ego with rich material
Swamaan
Abhimaan and false abhimaan
That is false abhimaan (mithya-abhimaan)
The sting of mustard seeds
The thermometer to measure pride
Nirmaani: the ego being pride-less
Nirmohi: the ego of being without attraction.....
Sat Purush is he who...
Nispruha: non-acquisitiveness; no inclination
No complacency in the Gnani
…no potapanu (‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’)
The sweetness of doer-ship (garva meethash) is.....
Only ‘Science’ will liberate you from garva
The Gnani has no garva (doer-ship)
The intoxication (keyf) of ‘I know’ increases with.....
Have the ego of ‘I don’t know anything’
The seer and the knower is not involved in.....
Garavata: stuck in indulgence of worldly pleasures
All this is garavata too...
How can one be freed from garavata?
61

282
283
284
286
288
288
289
294
297
304
306
308
309
312
312
313
315
317
318
319
320
322
323
324
327
328
331
332
334
336
340
343

Attain Liberation with help of the Gnani

346

[6] Laghutam (lightest): Gurutam (heaviest)
The state of the Gnani is laghutam and gurutam
348
Laghutam must be your intent
349
God is very pleased with the one without mamata
350
Junior of the junior
351
LCM: Lowest common factor is God
352
Only the laghutam state has value
352
Laghuta takes you towards guruta
353
Instead of being helpless in all respects…become laghutam 354
Consequences of guruta
355
Laghutam in the world leads to the ultimate.....
358
Undertake the yoga of laghutam
360
The world’s guru? No the world is the guru
361
What is a gurukilli?
362
‘Exactness’ through laghutam
363
The world’s disciple is the world’s superior (upari)
364
The precise manner in which Akram Vignan arose
365
Know the State of the Gnani
366
One’s conduct should be of laghutam intent
367
Line of Demarcation
368
The intent of Laghutam makes one follow.....
370
Where there is total laghutam, there is the state of the absolute372
The goal of becoming laghutam
373
The Grandeur of the state of Laghutam
374
To attain the Self is verily the gurutam
375
Test examination of the laghutam
375
The Foundation of Akram Science
376
Liberation with the laghutam ego
377
There is no racecourse in laghutam
377
62

The racecourses of the worldly life and.....
Criticism ruins everything for the one who criticizes
The escape from the racecourse
The misuse of intellect in daily life
The zero ego state of The Gnani
Win in this world by losing
You are correct by your viewpoint
Find the ways to lose in life
Expert in One, but in everything else...
The racecourse of life
The prize goes to the winner, the rest die panting
There is no winner when there is jealousy
Let others win
The Course of Akram Vignan

378
379
380
381
383
385
386
388
389
391
394
396
397
398

[7] Insistence (khench) : deceit (kapat) :
‘point-man’ (the one who leads you astray)
The Science of Akram Vignan unravels all entanglements
When one is insistent, the Gnani becomes silent
There should be no insistence for that
Bring a closure by becoming straight (sarad)
The ego after Gnan is lifeless and the prakruti dissipates
Deceit (kapat) and craftiness (chaturai)
‘Point-man’ on the path of liberation
‘What do I care?’ (‘Maarey shoo?’)
The deception that deludes and throws one off the.....
The belief of ‘I know’ is spiritual suicide

400
400
404
406
406
407
417
426
430
435

[8] Awareness (Jagruti) : The desire to be worshipped
Do not rush to answer questions about Gnan
On the path of full enlightenment...
Upsham - it is nothing but a smoldering fire
63

443
444
445

Partiality towards the self veils the reign of the Self
That is when awareness leads to the experience of Gnan
Starve the kashayas for three years
Certification for doing Satsang
The sweetness of doer-ship (garvaras) makes one fall
Grace and awareness are different
Subtle change of ownership when talking.....
Become a child of The Gnani
Hold the silence to attain the ultimate state of liberation
The intense greed and craving to be worshipped
Danger zones in the path of moksha
To move on inconspicuously
Subservience to the Gnani Purush
Behold the compassion of the Gnani

447
449
450
452
452
454
455
456
458
459
461
464
465
466

[9] I-ness (potapanu) : Supreme Soul (Parmatma)
Oneness with the entire universe
I-ness (potapanu)
The Gnani does not have ‘I-ness’
Naturalness is attained synchronously as the last.....
Drama begins when ‘I-ness’ decreases
Still the ‘I-ness’ remains
The authority is gone, the ‘I-ness’ remains
I, the lawyer, Mangaddas
Protection of the prakruti is the potapanu
Aggression is intense potapanu
The ‘seer’ does not have ‘I-ness’
The Test of ‘I-ness’
That is when ‘I-ness’ will go away
‘I-ness’ in the things one likes
Purusharth should begin with the right intent
64

469
470
471
473
474
475
476
478
479
480
482
483
485
489
487

‘I-ness’ melts as karmas are cleared
489
Discharge ego is ‘I-ness’
490
Relationship between karma, ‘I-ness’ and awareness
491
The Exact Awareness of Separation
492
‘I-ness’ melts away with real experience
496
All this is also ‘I-ness’
497
Purusharth is needed in whatever is unfolding in front of you
497
There lies the strength of Pragnya - the direct light of..... 498
This is how the experience as the Self grows
499
Specific details of ‘seeing and knowing’
500
The attainment in Akram Vignan
502
The one whose prakruti has become upsham.....
503
The grave danger of leaving the Gnani Purush
503
Speech without ownership is the sign of the Gnani
504
Only understand this Vignan, you need not do anything else 505
Only the one who understands this will attain
505
One whose ‘I-ness’ is gone becomes Parmatma
506


65

Note to the reader
The words ‘You’ or ‘Self’ when they begin with an initial
capital ‘Y’ or ‘S’ respectively, refers to the Soul or the real Self
or the Atma. Otherwise, they are used for the non-self, also
referred to as the relative-self, ‘Chandulal’ or the prakruti.
Whenever Dadashri uses the name ‘Chandulal’ or the name
of the person Dadashri is addressing, the reader should insert his
or her name for exact understanding.
Whenever Dadashri uses the term ‘we’, he is referring to
the Gnani Purush and ‘Dada Bhagwan’ who is the fully enlightened
Lord within him.
The words Self and Soul are interchangeable. The Soul is
one’s real Self.


66

1

Aptavani 9
[1]
Obstinacy (aadayee) : Sulking (risavu) :
Manipulative tantrums (tragu)
The Gnani Purush’s words are worth
understanding
The Gnani Purush’s words are actually straight. Moksha
(liberation) too is straight. Everyone is allowed into moksha; it
is not as if someone is barred from it. However, one must be
worthy of it. It is not possible to attain moksha if one walks a
crooked line. Therefore, why not become straight from the very
start? Moksha is not difficult to understand, but it helps to know
what the Gnani Purush is saying. If you do not understand what
He is saying, you will become confused. The words of the Gnani
Purush remain true for all times; the past, present and the future.
Any word the Gnani Purush utters is exactly what the
Tirthankaras (fully enlightened beings who liberate millions)
have said.
You should follow the instructions of the Gnani Purush.
Why? Who can be called a Gnani Purush? It is the one who is
straight in every way. He is straight while insulting and straight
while being insulted. However, when He does insult, He does
not truly insult because He is straight to begin with, so how can
He? ‘We’ have become frank and guileless right from the start.
And as far as you are concerned, you will have to get rid of your
obstinacy (aadayee), will you not? How long can you go on

2

Aptavani-1

being obstinate and inflexible? You will realize your obstinacy
when some day it surfaces from within. Another way to realize
your obstinacy is when you come to the Gnani Purush; you will
be surprised to learn how much obstinacy remains within you.
Will you not have to become straight?
Questioner: Why does obstinacy (aadayee) not go
away?
Dadashri: How can it go? It has made a home within you
for many days and then there is the unwritten renter’s law of our
land; a renter never leaves once he rents your home. So is the
obstinacy that has entered within you, ever likely to leave?
I told one person, “Why are you being so obstinate? Be
less obstinate!” He said, “One cannot survive in this world
without being obstinate.” I told him, “Even a snake has to
straighten up in order to enter its hole, so become straight if you
want to enter moksha. If not, people will straighten you out and
only then will you be able to go to moksha. People will beat you
and straighten you up. So what is wrong in becoming straight
yourself?” Do people not beat us and make us shape up
(straighten up)?
Questioner: They do but even then people do not
straighten up, do they?
Dadashri: But there is no choice except to straighten up
sooner or later, is there? Obstinacy will leave on its own once
you have a bitter experience. There exists endless obstinacy.
One has never met anyone to straighten him out in any of his
previous lives. He would not wander in this manner had he met
someone. So everything happens, but he does not remain
straight. What does the world do? It keeps beating him to the
point where he straightens up. If he does not straighten up, then
his wife, his children and the world will beat him into becoming
straight.

Aptavani-9

3

I became straight and wise after taking beatings from
people for so many lives. Just behold, when I became straight
forward, then this Gnan expressed within, did it not? I too was
not straight. The world will straighten you out. Those who are
not straight will one day have to become straight. However,
people remain obstinate even in their old age. This progeny of
obstinacy is nothing ordinary. It makes one become obstinate in
one’s own home!
When a child dies, the grandfather will wail and cry out
loudly, “My only grandchild is gone.” He cries as if he is never
going to die himself. Is he never going to die? Even if he has
become a grandfather?! Yet he cries over his son’s son! You
fool, why don’t you straighten up now that you are close to
leaving this world? Is departure not imminent for the one who
becomes a grandfather? The signal to exit this world has fallen
from the day he became a grandfather. And yet he talks as if his
train is never going to leave! The signal has fallen so wake up
and be aware.
Questioner: The signal for the train’s departure has
come.
Dadashri: Yes the signal has fallen, the train is ready to
leave and so you need to straighten up.
If you admit to be being obstinate, you will
defeat the obstinacy
What is obstinacy (aadayee)? Many a times you tell
people, ‘Hey! Why are you being obstinate?’ Or sometimes
people tell you, ‘Why are you being obstinate?’ Do you or do
you not recognize obstinacy?
Questioner: Obstinacy is recognizable.
Dadashri: How long have you known it?
Questioner: From the time I understood it.
Dadashri: So have you got rid of your stock of obstinacy

4

Aptavani-9

or have you kept it? Have you kept it? You are saying ‘yes’. If
you say ‘no’ would obstinacy not leave?
Questioner: It will leave when we say ‘yes’.
Dadashri: Is that so? Would it not leave if you say ‘no’?
Questioner: No, it will become stronger if one says ‘no’.
Dadashri: Do people not say ‘no’? They say, ‘I do not
have any obstinacy in me.’
Obstinacy: Common and Uncommon
Who does not have the experience of obstinacy? The
greater the buddhi (intellect), the greater is one’s obstinacy.
Those who have wisdom (samaj - right understanding) are less
obstinate. Those with heavy veils over spirituality are very
obstinate. They will not let go of their obstinacy. Now what do
you call such obstinacy? What is the difference between their
obstinacy and that of an average person? What is the difference
between common and uncommon obstinacy? Uncommon
obstinacy is unshakeable (gaaddha) obstinacy. Such obstinacy
cannot be rid of, just like this state of gaaddha samkit
(gaaddha - unshakeable. Samkit - right belief and right vision
of ‘I am pure Soul’), which can never leave; neither can the state
of gaaddha mithyatva i.e. unshakable deeply entrenched
wrong belief of ‘I am Chandulal’ ever leave. No matter how
much you make a person understand, he will not let go of his
position. Such is the uncommon obstinacy; it will not leave its
position.
Obstinacy in men and women
Do you have a little bit of obstinacy (aadayee) in you? A
little at least?! Then why not ask him to help you get rid of it?
A few hurtful jabs from him will make the obstinacy in you go
away.
Questioner: Does obstinacy leave only through hurtful
jabs?

Aptavani-9

5

Dadashri: Then how else? Does he not prod you ever?
Otherwise, there is nothing but baggage of obstinacy everywhere.
A person without obstinacy is considered straight (sarad) and
flexible; he can be molded in any shape or form.
Questioner: Do men ever admit to their obstinacy
(aadayee)? He will only know his obstinacy when his wife says
something to him.
Dadashri: Women too are very obstinate. ‘We’ are not
talking about just men. It is only when both parents are so, that
children turn out the way they do. And it is men who make the
women obstinate. Women are not obstinate by nature; they are
not born obstinate. Men are obstinate from their very birth. Even
in the womb, they jab their mothers with their elbows. If the
mother happens to eat something spicy, he jabs his mother from
the inside with his arms and legs. Women are not born obstinate
like men.
You have to see your own obstinacy
People talk about obstinacy (aadayee) in others as if they
have got rid of their own obstinacy. One should not make
statements such as, ‘He is obstinate’.
Questioner: Dada, is it my obstinacy if I say, ‘he is very
obstinate’?
Dadashri: That is the greatest obstinacy.
Questioner: So we have to see our own obstinacy?
Dadashri: Then whose? If you point out obstinacy
(aadayee) in someone else, he will immediately become an
adversary.
Questioner: Many times, we do not even recognize our
obstinacy, in fact, many times our obstinacy appears as straight
forwardness to us.
Dadashri: You would not recognize it. You have to enter

6

Aptavani-9

deep within your self to see it. You have to adopt an impartial
attitude to see obstinacy.
When someone says, ‘Why are you being obstinate?’ you
respond by saying, ‘Just look at him! He is a fool. Am I being
obstinate or he is being obstinate?’, on the contrary the man is
telling you to investigate, so then you should. People do not look
at their own obstinacy and they go looking for obstinacy in
others. Why do people not accuse me of being obstinate? If
they were to see obstinacy in me, they would not refrain from
telling me so. The world will tell you what it sees.
When obstinacy leaves…
Some men tell their wives, ‘If you make the tea, I will not
drink it.’ Oh! ho ho! Then whose tea will you drink? Exercising
his role as a husband (dhani; owner), he intimidates his wife.
What does he tell her? ‘You ruined the tea, so I will not drink
tea again if you make it.’ He intimidates the poor woman. He
becomes awkward and obstinate. So much obstinacy! That is
why there is so much suffering!
Therefore, obstinacy (aadayee) is the obstacle, not
attachment (moha). A person may enjoy attachment (moha)
once or twice but the third time around he will get tired of it.
What happens if someone serves you a good meal with an
upset and a non-communicative (risavu; sulking) face? You will
not like it, will you? Would you not say, ‘The heck with your
meal’? Even if someone gives you diamonds with an upset and
non-communicative (risavu) face, will you not say, ‘Keep your
diamonds to yourself’? So what is worth more, diamonds or an
upset and non-communicative (risavu) face? Our people will
not accept a diamond if given by someone with such a face.
People of foreign countries will eat a meal even if their spouse
is upset and non-communicative (risavu) but in India, the wife
will get into trouble for doing that. Nevertheless, women in India
will not behave this way. It does not matter in the foreign

Aptavani-9

7

countries. There, even if a man were to give diamonds with an
upset and non-communicative (risavu) face, the woman will
think, ‘Let him sulk (risavu) if he wants to. At least I get the
diamonds.’ What do you think?
Questioner: That is true.
Dadashri: So then, is the value of being upset and noncommunicative (risavu) at home not worth more than the value
of the diamonds?
Even a child will not let you touch his money. He will say,
‘These are my rupees, give them back to me.’ A person may be
straight in one matter but obstinate in another, he will not
become free until that obstinacy is gone. It is possible to attain
the state of God if obstinacy leaves. ‘Dada’ has become
completely free from all obstinacy.
Everyone’s obstinacy is different in method and approach.
What you state and consider as obstinate, is obstinacy you
cannot see in yourself. If you can see your obstinacy, then you
become God. One becomes God when he sees his own
obstinacy. Even now, where can you see your own obstinacy?
Otherwise, you would have become God.
Obstinacy is the only obstacle
Therefore, one needs to become straight. Do I have any
problems, now that I have become straight? I have become
straight as a result of taking so many beatings over countless
past lives. Now there is no obstinacy at all left in me. If you tell
‘us’ “Let us go down stairs”, then ‘we’ will come with you.
‘We’ do not have any obstinacy (aadayee) whatsoever.
Someone may say, ‘You are like this’ or ‘you are like that.’ He
is saying it to the ‘one’ who is that way. I would not tell that man
he is wrong. What is more, I will even understand to whom he
is addressing. He is not saying it to ‘me’ he is saying it to my
‘neighbor’.

8

Aptavani-9

Questioner: Who is your neighbor?
Dadashri: This ‘A. M. Patel’ is the first neighbor. He (A.
M. Patel) is also a contractor and an income-tax payer. That
man is addressing this neighbor of mine.
They say that Gnan cannot manifest in the one who lives
a worldly life. Hey, the income tax payer is there, and the
contract business where bribery is commonplace is also there,
and yet the Gnan has expressed! So then what creates obstacles
in this worldly life? Your obstinacy (aadayee) is the obstacle. I
had seen a lot of obstinacy in me. I became a Gnani after all the
obstinacy went away. When no obstinacy remains within you,
then realize that you have become a Gnani.
Nature of obstinacy
Questioner: How should I understand the nature of
obstinacy (aadayee)?
Dadashri: It is when one does not accept that which his
heart accepts, and acts according to his own opinion and
understanding. ‘We’ do not say anything to anyone or pressure
anyone, and if ‘we’ ever do and even then he does not accept
it, then is that not his aadayee (obstinacy)? Is that not acting
according to his own opinion and will? Should he not be
following the Agna (directive) of the Gnani?
Questioner: Really speaking, we have to follow the
Agnas of the Gnani.
Dadashri: Aadayee (obstinacy) is prevalent. Wherever it
is, the worldly problems have arisen because of aadayee. Only
‘we’ are devoid of such obstinacy. ‘We’ have come to zero
obstinacy. If someone pressures us by saying, ‘You will have to
do things this way otherwise we will go on a fast,’ then in order
to prevent them from undergoing the pain and the trouble of
fasting, ‘we’ would tell him, “‘We’ will do it but do not go on
a fast.”

Aptavani-9

9

Questioner: Is that not called obstinacy?
Dadashri: No, obstinacy (aadayee) is to maintain, ‘We
will go on a fast.’ This is where the whole world is stuck.
Questioner: Is it not aadayee when a person does not
follow your directions?
Dadashri: That is indeed an aadayee, what else? Is
Dadaji likely to tell you to do anything otherwise? He would
only say something if it is for your own benefit. Therefore, you
should not be obstinate where Dadaji is concerned.
Becoming straight through understanding
Have you ever seen aadayee (obstinacy) in someone?
Have you seen that it exists in people?
Questioner: Dada, I had it within me. I was very
obstinate.
Dadashri: Is that so? You are the knower of the one who
was obstinate. Is the knower not separate? Or is the knower the
one who is obstinate? No. The one who is obstinate is not the
knower. The knower is separate; the knower is the Self. So did
all your obstinacy go away?
Questioner: It is still there, Dada.
Dadashri: Then you still have to become straight.
Aadayee (obstinacy) is not acceptable. If you do not become
straight with this Gnan of ours, then people will beat you into
becoming straight. So, it is better if you straighten up through
understanding. That will save you all the hassle. One always gets
hurt when he interferes (dakho-dakhal; becomes Chandulal).
Hence, interference straightens him constantly. When the horns
of obstinacy are broken right here, then all work is done. All
aadayee (obstinacy) is bestial. When a couple of wise men
plead with the one with obstinacy, ‘Please listen to us,’ do you
know what he will say? He will say, ‘No I find it hard to

10

Aptavani-9

believe.’ He exposes his obstinacy in front of us thus. Moksha
will be attained only when that obstinacy goes away.
Necessities for progress along the path of
moksha
If someone were to tell us, ‘Dada, bow down to all these
people’, then I would do so and I would do it five times over.
‘We’ would bow down to even a vagrant. ‘We’ have ways to
bow down in any manner that is necessary. ‘We’ have a way to
bow down to the Soul and a way to bow down to the vagrant.
If he says, ‘Do not bow down to the Soul, bow only to the
vagrant,’ ‘we’ would do that too. So you must have humility.
Complete humility! The one who completely ‘dissolves in water’
(becomes completely egoless) will be blessed with the ultimate.
If a lump (ego) remains in water, it means it has not completely
dissolved and so it will just keep going round and round.
Obstinate people will simply keep wandering round and round,
life after life.
As a lot of worldly respect is gained, a spiritually elevated
person will become more humble; his ego will not be evident, he
will not be inflexible. Egoistic inflexibility (akadai) is a
characteristic of an inferior human being. When a person attains
this spiritual knowledge but still exhibits inflexibility, then he is an
inferior human being. How can one have this Gnan and continue
to remain rigid and inflexible?
The one who readily accepts the truth is called a straight
(sarad) person.
Questioner: If we accept what others tell us as the truth
and follow through, then we become vulnerable to hurt, will we
not?
Dadashri: It is better to stumble and learn. If a saint says,
‘I have full faith in human beings’ someone may ask him, ‘What
if someone deceives you some day?’ He will reply, ‘One man
may swindle me, and another may do the same, but some day

Aptavani-9

11

I am bound to meet a man through whom my work will get
done.’ What does the saint mean when he says this? He is
saying that through subjecting himself to being deceived, one day
his work will get accomplished. Those who avoid being
deceived will wander around life after life and never achieve
anything because they never trust anyone. When will a person
attain anything if he remains suspicious? Do you understand this
theory?
Straightness (saradata) means to readily accept whatever
the other person says, even if it means there is a possibility of
being cheated in the process. One, two or five people may cheat
you, but you will find one out of five hundred who will not.
Otherwise, you will not find that honest person, will you? Is this
not a good system? You will be cheated only if it is in the
unfolding of your karma (prarabdha), otherwise who will cheat
you? You will one day find that truth if you move through life
being cheated.
What do we mean by being sarad (straight)? When
someone tells him, ‘This train is going to Ahmedabad’, he gets
on it readily, without complaining, that is called being sarad.
Whereas the one who is asarad will question, ‘What’s the
guarantee that this train will take us to Ahmedabad? Let’s ask
someone else.’ Will the train not leave by that time? Many trains
(opportunity to attain the right path) have left and he remains
standing exactly where he has always been.
What is straightness (sarad)? For example, if you cook
freshly picked okra, they will cook within ten minutes. That is
called straight. And what is asarad (not straight, complicated)?
What happens to the okras that are kept in the refrigerator?
Those are asarad okras (they do not cook well; they take a
long time). Similarly, the Lord says that a person who is straight
(sarad) and without guile will attain moksha. The one who is not
straight (asarad) will not make any progress on this path.

12

Aptavani-9

Questioner: It appears that we will find everything
wherever we go but there is a lack of straightness (asarad)
there.
Dadashri: There is no straightness to be found. The
following qualities are not found anywhere. You do not see
spontaneous forgiveness (sahaj kshama) anywhere. If you say
something to someone, he cannot refrain from making a mental
note (nondha) of it; he will remember it for months on end. Not
keeping a note is called natural forgiveness (sahaj kshama).
Then what is next? Then there is the quality of being harsh
or callous (kathor). There are all kinds of harshness.
Then there is all kind of insistence (aagraha). A person
with these qualities will not have any straightness (saradata) in
him and so no matter how hard one tries to change him, he will
not change. He has no humility (namrata), in addition to lacking
straightness. You will need topmost straightness. Then you need
topmost humility. What is namrata (humility)? It is to bow
completely before the other person begins to bow. It is to bow
to the one who is rigid and inflexible. This is a sign that one will
attain moksha. What is the nature of a human being? If someone
is being rigid and inflexible, he too will become rigid and
inflexible; he will react in the same manner. People become
inflexible with the one who refuses to give in.
Then one should not have any greed (lobh) whatsoever.
Greed holds people back from making any spiritual progress.
That is why the Lord has said for people to go on pilgrimage
and other such activities and spend money. The tuber of greed
will decrease as you spend money. Otherwise, greed will
continue to increase like the ‘push of 99’ (if a person has 99
rupees, he will be pushed by his greed to save one more rupee
so he can have one hundred rupees). Therefore, one’s inner
intent should be to have no need or want for any worldly thing.
When all the ‘ghosts’ of kashayas i.e. the inner enemies of anger,

Aptavani-9

13

pride, deceit and greed, leave and you become straight, then
you will attain moksha.
Obstinacy during the early years of Ambalal
Patel (Dadashri’s relative self)
Back in the old days, there was a saying:
“Duniya diwani kahevashe re, bhoondi bhito ma
bhatkashe.
paap ey enu jyare pragat thashe, tyare bhuva-jati
gher jashe”
Meaning when one’s demerit karmas come into fruition,
he will resort to all kinds of solutions; he will seek help of the
exorcists, voodooist, black magicians etc. So a person looks
for an exorcist, a saint, or others for help when his demerit
karma expresses its effect. Some poet has sung something like
that.
Questioner: Dada, when did you read this pad (poetic
hymn)?
Dadashri: It is about fifty-five years old; it is not very
old. It is not a two or five thousand years old saying.
Questioner: But how can you remember it all?
Dadashri: ‘We’ do not remember anything. ‘We’ do not
even remember whether today is Monday or Tuesday!
Questioner: Then where did all this come from, Dada?
Dadashri: ‘We’ can see it all. If ‘we’ turn one way, ‘we’
can immediately see everything and therefore ‘we’ speak. If
‘we’ see anything beneficial, then ‘we’ will say it. Why would
‘we’ try to commit anything to memory? ‘We’ continue to see
all the way back to when I was young. ‘We’ can see all the
phases…‘it was like this…it was like that… ‘we’ used to enter
the classroom only after the school bell rang; ‘we’ can see all

14

Aptavani-9

that.’ The teacher used to get very upset. He could not say
anything but he would be aggravated from within.
Questioner: Why did you go only after the bell?
Dadashri: It was a kind of a pomp; kind of a show-off.
It was just a false pride (khumari)! I suffered because of that;
I did not straighten up. A straight person would go and sit in the
class before the bell.
Questioner: Is showing-off not a wrong path?
Dadashri: It is a wrong path indeed. This fellow (A. M.
Patel – Dadashri’s relative self) would come into the classroom
after the bell had rung; the teacher would already be in the
classroom. It is acceptable for the teacher to be late but as a
rule should the students not be in time? This is the obstinacy. On
top of that, he (A. M. Patel) would say, ‘Who does the teacher
think he is?’ Hey you! Look here! Do you want to learn at
school or do you want confrontations? He would reply, ‘No,
first is the confrontation.’ That is called looking for a confrontation.
Questioner: So the teacher could not say anything to
you?
Dadashri: He could and yet he would not; he dare not
because he was afraid of the retaliation of being beaten up
outside the school!
Questioner: Dada, were you so mischievous?
Dadashri: Yes, mischievous indeed. The entire baggage
was nothing but that of a troublemaker and obstinacy.
Questioner: And amidst all that such a Gnan expressed!
That is great.
Dadashri: The Gnan came to be. This is because of the
purity within. There was no attachment (mamata). The problem
verily was of this ego. The lack of attachment led to this state
of the Gnani. There was no trace of attachment or greed-laden

Aptavani-9

15

temptation (lalacha) but if someone were to even utter my name
in a negative manner, I would let him have it! Many people
would make comments behind my back like, ‘he is a troublemaker’ or ‘Don’t even talk about him, just leave him alone, he
is cantankerous and bad tempered!’ They used all kinds of
adjectives for me! I knew what adjectives they were using for
me, behind my back. But I had no attachment and that was the
main attribute in me. The current glorious state (of a Gnani) is
due to this very attribute. A person with attachment, no matter
how wise, is deeply entrenched in the worldly life. ‘We’ were
without attachment so life has been fun all along. Attachment
verily is the cause of worldly life. The ego is not the cause of
worldly life.
I too feel now that I have straightened up. No one has to
straighten me.
Questioner: How did you become straight, Dada?
Dadashri: People of the world beat me one way or
another; through their devious and worldly ways, they trapped
me one way or another and shaped me up.
Questioner: Has this cleansing (straightening) been
ongoing from your previous lives?
Dadashri: This had been happening from many previous
lives and that is why I became completely straight in this life.
Otherwise, the stock of India is obstinate by nature; you can
never find straightness in India. Some are even born upside
down, feet first and there are others who are obstinate even in
their mother’s womb; they hurt their mothers even when they are
in the womb! Some change to the wrong position in the womb;
they hurt their mother to the point of dying during delivery,
even to the point of hurting the reputation of the obstetrician in
the process.
Questioner: But he does not have any desire to do all
that. Does that not happen on it own?

16

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: It happens because he is obstinate by nature.
He becomes obstinate wherever he goes. Even in the womb!
And a straight person will be straight wherever he goes.
Questioner: People of India are obstinate and yet they
are deserving of moksha!
Dadashri: It is like this; only those who are obstinate go
to moksha. Who becomes obstinate, is it the one with
understanding or the one without understanding? Would the one
with understanding be the one to become obstinate?
Questioner: But all that understanding is wrong is it not
Dada?
Dadashri: It is because the understanding is obstructed.
There is no obstinacy in people of foreign countries. They say
it as it is.
Questioner: Dada can you explain what you mean by
this understanding being obstructed?
Dadashri: Our increased understanding becomes an
obstruction. If this understanding does not become helpful to
you, then it will take you on the wrong path.
You will find a solution when your obstinacy goes away.
Obstinacy is essentially the ego; it is an offshoot of the ego.
The ego is the basis
Do you like obstinacy?
Questioner: I do not like it but it does not go away.
Dadashri: I will get rid of it for you. You are aware that
obstinacy arises within you and that it does not go away, are you
not? That itself is awakened awareness (jagruti). Otherwise,
one is not aware at all of obstinacy when it arises. The
awareness of obstinacy arising is not there at all. If you ask
someone, ‘Why are you being obstinate?’ he will tell you, ‘you
are the one who is obstinate.’ Would he not immediately

Aptavani-9

17

retaliate in this manner? If his boss tells him he is being obstinate,
he will not speak a word because it is coming from his boss but
nevertheless he will retaliate in his mind! And that is because of
the ego, what will the ego not do? Everything is based on the
ego. Everything is supported by the ego. One is the absolute
Self (parmatma) when that ego is gone.
Questioner: But, in such instances, so many times we
end up saying, ‘This is wrong.’
Dadashri: Yes, you will make such statements. That is an
old habit of ours from time immemorial! But you also realize that
you did some thing wrong. Do you not realize this after having
said so?
Questioner: Yes.
Dadashri: But it is an old habit that has been there for
countless lives. It is subject to the law of action and reaction and
therefore it is not likely to cease suddenly.
Never say, ‘I cannot do it’
From now on, you should not say, ‘the obstinacy does
not go away.’ Because when I ask people how they are doing,
they tell me, ‘Sir, I know everything, but I am not able to do it.’
What kind of people are you? You have turned the Self to this?
In spite of my telling you that the Atma can become whatever
you imagine it to be, you still make statements such as ‘I know
everything but I cannot do it.’ Is that what you are telling me?
Then the Atma will become just like that; it will become
crippled. You should never say, ‘I know it all but I cannot do
it.’ Especially, you should never say, ‘I cannot do it.’ When I
have a fever and someone asks, ‘Are you running a fever?’ I tell
them, ‘Yes, I know that A. M. Patel has a fever.’ If I say, ‘I
have a fever’ then it becomes attached to me. You immediately
become whatever you envision (kalpey). Therefore, I do not
say any such things.

18

Aptavani-9

The main nature (swabhav) of the Self is that one
becomes whatever he envisions. If you say ‘I am God’, then you
become like God, and if you say, ‘I am worthless’, then you will
become worthless. You become that, the moment you say it.
When you say, I should become a God, then at that moment you
do become God, but then you will ask, ‘What should I do
now?’ So you do not know it well and hence you revert to what
you were before, dim-witted! Should you not learn how?
Should you not know what you have to do after attaining the
Self? Otherwise, you will revert to what you were before. The
Self becomes what it envisions (chintavan) and because it is so,
it will continue to take on countless different forms and change
from one form to another of whatever is envisioned. The one
who is envisioning is not doing it independently. The pressure
of his surroundings and the prevailing circumstances influences
the envisioning.
The knowledge guides one’s conduct
Questioner: So what is the root cause of obstinacy?
Dadashri: The ego.
Questioner: But is it not the effect of past life’s causes?
Dadashri: It is an effect, but only because the causes
were created. How do causes occur? First comes the knowledge
of obstinacy that says, ‘If I become obstinate and inflexible,
everyone will straighten out. I will become obstinate to sort
everyone out at home. Obstinacy can be very useful.’ One
attains this knowledge first, and then the faith (shraddha) sets in.
The faith in turn strengthens that knowledge. Knowledge without
faith will not last, but when faith develops, it makes the
knowledge stronger and then that obstinacy comes into conduct.
Then all the fun (!) begins!
Everyone’s obstinacy is different
Questioner: Everyone does not have similar obstinacy,
do they?

Aptavani-9

19

Dadashri: Each obstinacy is different. Are all vegetables
the same? There are all kinds of vegetables; obstinacies too are
of different kind. Everyone’s kadhee (soup) is different and
varies; everyone’s height is different and so is their color. Is
everything not different?
Obstinacy leaves when one attains this Gnan. If obstinacy
remains in a person, can one not see it within? No one wishes
to hang on to their obstinacy or to keep it safe in a bank vault!
Those obstinacies will end
Questioner: We are unable to adjust even when we
make a decision to adjust. What is the reason behind this? Is it
due to our obstinacy or does our vyavasthit not allow our efforts
to succeed?
Dadashri: No, it is because obstinacies are still there. It
is all obstinacy. For the one whose obstinacy is gone, all
entanglements clear. Your obstinacy is starting to leave and one
day it will end. This is because the faucet of the ‘tank’ (pending
karmic accounts) is wide open and running and nothing more or
new (no new causes are created) is coming into the tank (karmic
tank) and that is why one day the tank will empty. From now
on, nothing new is taking place in your factory of obstinacy and
your old ones continue to dissipate. One obstinacy will surface
and it will come to an end, then another one will come to surface
and it too will clear and a third one will surface. Obstinacies that
come to surface will leave.
Straight and yet there were subtle
obstinacies
Questioner: In the Aptasutra (Dadashri’s major volume
of 4237 Gnan aphorisms) it says, “Before attaining Gnan, ‘we’
had crossed the entire ocean of obstinacy. Meaning, this Gnan
only manifested after every obstinacy was broken.”
Dadashri: Yes, there was a lot of obstinacy (aadayee).

20

Aptavani-9

People could not see it but ‘we’ could tell there was obstinacy
(aadayee) within. On the contrary, people saw me as being
straight (sarad). There were small obstinacies, subtle obstinacies,
and egotistic ones. They were not of the body; not the kind of
becoming upset and non-communicative (risavu). They were
obstinacies of the ego. I could tell that the inner adjustment has
taken a wrong turn with reference to an interaction with a certain
person even though that person would not be aware of it.
Questioner: Does that count as obstinacy (aadayee)?
Dadashri: Then what else? If the other person is right
and we do not accept it within, is that not madness of the ego?
Questioner: So is obstinacy not a distortion of the ego?
Dadashri: It is definitely the ego. The buddhi (intellect)
has nothing to do with it.
Questioner: But is it not a distorted ego?
Dadashri: Distorted indeed. What kind of a distortion?
People will say behind your back, ‘Just leave him alone, he is
a little ‘crack (mad)’ Don’t even mention his name.’ Hey you!
How can there be a crack in the head if the engine is still
running?
In those situations you should be alert.
Questioner: There are many who pounce on us the
moment we gently suggest, ‘Sir, it is like this…’
Dadashri: Yes, there are some who will react that way
but you should be careful before you say anything, otherwise
anything is likely to happen. A fight will ensue because they do
not understand what you are trying to say. They will
misunderstand you. The other person will not understand your
good intentions and will take it the wrong way and so he will
fight you. If that happens then you should realize that what you
are saying is not reaching that person and you should not say

Aptavani-9

21

anything further. You should continue listening to him but you
should not try to make him understand what you are saying; he
simply does not understand your viewpoint.
Only a Gnani can straighten him out
Questioner: What should we do when someone is being
obstinate?
Dadashri: People simply don’t have the courage to deal
with such tasks! That kind of equanimity is ‘our’ (the Gnani’s)
task. That person would never behave obstinately around me
again. The day he tries to be obstinate, he will not see any
reward from me. He will try to test me and then he will never
be obstinate around me. Obstinacy has become strong because
it has received encouragement. Generally, people are feeble and
when someone is being obstinate with them, what do they do?
They will give in and say, ‘Just let him go.’ People are soft and
therefore they encourage obstinacy. When the obstinate one
comes near ‘us’, he will find out.
Questioner: Is it true that we bring this stock of
obstinacy from our past life?
Dadashri: It is all from the past life. Nothing of it is from
this life.
Questioner: In that case, will it become strong if it gets
encouragement in this life?
Dadashri: Yes, it does become stronger but nobody can
have their way with a person who is unattached (nispruha).
The Gnani is pleased with the one who
becomes sarad
Nothing that anyone does can affect the detachment
(nispruhata) of the Gnani. The one who does not keep any
distinction between ‘mine’ and ‘someone else’s’, can accomplish
whatever he wants. If you make such a person happy (rajipo

22

Aptavani-9

- if you make the Gnani happy) then the entire universe (one’s
total being) will become happy. But it is not easy to make him
happy because the Gnani Purush is extremely straight (sarad)
and that is why it is difficult to do so. An hour’s worth of the
Gnani’s rajipo will accomplish your goal of salvation. I tell
everyone and I give them a guarantee that I can bestow the
same state as mine upon the one who wants it, within an hour.
But it is difficult to attain straightness (saradata), is it not?
The Gnani Purush is extremely sarad (straight) and that is
why it is difficult to attain his rajipo and please him. If the Gnani
Purush were not straight (asarad) then he would be easily
pleased. However, this Gnani Purush is extremely sarad and
thus He is difficult to please. Now how can you please the one
who is sarad (straight)? You can please him when you become
sarad (straight) yourself. Yes, He will be pleased if he comes
down from that level (a sarad level), how can He be pleased
otherwise? You can own the whole universe with an hour of the
Gnani’s rajipo! That is how much rajipo He has. What can the
One, who wants nothing in this world, not give? But it is not
easy to attain such a rajipo. You have to become straight
(sarad) in order to attain it. The Gnani Purush is more sarad
than even a year old child. Now how can you attain His rajipo
and please Him, when you are not straight? How can you attain
that from a straight (sarad) person when you are not straight
(sarad) in front of him? You need that level here. Do you
understand all this?
A Dramatic ego!
Questioner: It is said in the Aptasutra, ‘There is no
problem with the ego that is flowing but to seize the ego even
a little, is obstinacy.’ So what is flowing ego?
Dadashri: The ego that you see in women is a flowing
ego. It is ego when she says, ‘Right now I am making soup and
I will cook the vegetables in no time’, but it is a flowing ego.

Aptavani-9

23

Whereas men hold on to the ego, ‘I told you to do this but you
did that!’ That is obstinacy (aadayee).
Questioner: So is the flowing ego the same as the
dramatic ego – the ego that plays the role of the worldly life
without attachment?
Dadashri: It is the dramatic ego. There is no problem
with the flowing ego. If men have a flowing ego, there is no
problem. It is obstinacy when they hold on to the ego.
Obstinacy leaves by ‘knowing’ that it has
occurred
Questioner: Once a person realizes he has been
obstinate, how can he turn it around if he wants to?
Dadashri: The fact that he ‘Knows’ that obstinacy has
occurred, verily means that he is turning around. ‘He’ (the one
who has awakened) turns back the instant he ‘knows’ (inner
experience of Knowledge - anubhav) that obstinacy is occurring.
He cannot turn back as long as he does not know and
‘knowing’ means he will definitely turn around.
Questioner: What other adjustments does one have to
take to turn around?
Dadashri: Nothing else, ‘he’ will turn around automatically.
Whatever process is necessary, ‘he’ will turn around with that
process. There are processes (vidhis) of adjustments. If one has
taken Gnan, he will come to ‘know’ ‘his’ obstinacy, but not
otherwise. And here, he directly begins to see his faults.
Questioner: One turns around when he knows his
obstinacy (aadayee). How does he know the obstinacy? How
does he recognize it?
Dadashri: He will recognize it immediately. If he has
taken ‘our’ Gnan, then he will immediately recognize that he is
starting to become obstinate. He will immediately know whether

24

Aptavani-9

his worldly interaction is within acceptable norms or not.
Questioner: But how can one recognize his own
obstinacy?
Dadashri: He will know if he has our Gnan. He will not
otherwise and even if he knows, he would cover it up and
continue to remain obstinate. One can know because of the
power of our Gnan.
Questioner: What is it to cover up obstinacy?
Dadashri: Covering up the obstinacy is double obstinacy.
Questioner: Then there is no scope of getting rid of the
original obstinacy, is there?
Dadashri: On the contrary, it increases.
Questioner: But our main aim is to get rid of obstinacy
from its very roots, is it not? What should we do there?
Dadashri: You will not be able to do it yourself if you try.
You should ask me how it is and I will tell you ‘Brother, get rid
of this obstinacy.’
Questioner: There is obstinacy to begin with and then he
covers it up, that is double the obstinacy. Then that obstinacy
will not allow him to open up and ask. What should he do there?
Dadashri: But someone like me will ask, ‘Where are you
going? Which ‘town’ do you have to go to (What is your
spiritual destination)?’ Most people are such that if you tell them
as it is; they will take the opposite way. In spite of you speaking
candidly to them and they will take the obstinate path.
Therefore, I have to twist things around before I say anything to
them. Their spiritual state is still weak, is it not? I have to sweettalk them in order to get the work done. We have to explain
things to little children.
Questioner: They all look like children and you have to

Aptavani-9

25

pamper them and take them to moksha. What compassion you
must have at the time!
Dadashri: They all look like children. It is exactly like
when a child is upset and non-communicative (risavu) but I
have to pamper them and make them progress.
Questioner: I have even seen you asking them for
forgiveness as you pamper them.
Dadashri: I have to take them to moksha so do I not
have to proceed with vigilance? What do they stand to lose?
There was a man who said, ‘Dadaji, here is your Gnan and here
are your books. I am giving them back to you.’ I told him, ‘Yes,
you did a good thing. I am obliged to you.’ He could have
thrown the books away. Should I not appreciate the fact that he
came to our home to return the books? Is that not a virtuous
quality? ‘I am giving you back your Gnan!’ he said. Only I
would take it back calmly!
Questioner: With calm, and that too with a sense of
obligation!
Dadashri: Yes, He is a wise man because he did not
throw them away. He did a good thing.
Questioner: It is because you are a Gnani Purush that
the other person’s obstinacy leaves.
Dadashri: It goes away quickly. Otherwise, it leaves after
he takes a lot of beating and through bitter realization. As one
suffers bitter experiences, he learns from them and the obstinacy
begins to leave. Otherwise, it takes many, many lifetimes.
It should not be so
Questioner: For the mahatmas who have taken Gnan,
what hinders them more; their obstinacy (aadayee) or their
insurmountable inner obstacle (atkan)?
Dadashri: Insurmountable inner obstacle (atkan)! The

26

Aptavani-9

obstinacies do not trouble much. As far as obstinacy is
concerned, he understands that it is wrong. After attaining this
Gnan, the obstinacy gives ‘him’ a beating. This obstinacy is a
karmic stock that was gathered and charged in the past life. That
stock is now giving its effect in this life in the form of a beating.
Therefore, no one likes obstinacy (aadayee). But insurmountable
inner obstacle (atkan) leads to more suffering. These faults still
give you trouble in spite of having this Gnan. You should not
have this stock but once you have brought the stock with you
from the ‘market’, you cannot deny or avoid it, can you?
Whatever stock you have, it is there because you accumulated
(puran – created a cause) it in your past life, and now it will
discharge (galan – the effect of the cause created). No one is
going to accumulate any new stock after Gnan. You have to
‘purify’ your old stock through the process of just ‘seeing’ it as
it unfolds and let go of it, regardless of what that stock is.
Nevertheless from now on, should your internal state not be that
of ‘how can all the worldly interactions (vyavahar) become
cleansed’?
‘You’ are not the obstinate ‘one’
I have straightened you out! Have I not? Who was the
obstinate one? It was ‘Chandulal’, your relative-self. ‘You’ are
not Chandulal. Therefore, ‘You’ just have to say, ‘I am not this.
I am this Shuddhatma.’ Then, does your obstinacy not go away?
What do you think?
That is why this Akram Vignan (Science) has straightened
out all the householders (gruhasthis - married people). In the
traditional Kramic path, one has to become a sadhu (ascetic) in
order to become straight. The householder who becomes
straight has the solution at hand whereas otherwise in order to
become straight, he has to become a sadhu. You become aware
that this ‘Chandulal’ is obstinate and ‘I’ am straight. Therefore,
you have become straight without becoming a sadhu, have you
not? Is this Akram Vignan not wonderful!

Aptavani-9

27

Yet what do people tell me? ‘This Chandulal is the way
he always was’, but ‘we’ are not concerned about that. In that
situation what do ‘we’ tell them? ‘We’ tell them, ‘The Chandulal
that you see is different from the Chandulal ‘we’ see.’ People
see faults, do they not? Will someone not say to you, ‘you run
after ‘Dada’ but you are still just the way you were before?’
There ‘You’ are not that obstinate ‘one’. Nevertheless You
should listen to what they tell you and then when you go home,
‘You’ have to tell Chandulal, ‘People will tell you what they see
and how they see you, so now you need to shape up. ‘Dada’
and ‘I’ are with you and so straighten up in our presence.’ Then
he (Chandulal) will straighten up but otherwise a person cannot
shape up even if he wants to; he would not be able to do so on
his own. Or else a guru can also straighten him up but that guru
has to be straight himself. However, it is difficult to find such
a guru!
This Akram Vignan is like that
So, the one who was obstinate is not ‘I’. This is how one
vacates the whole place altogether. Then what else is left? The
‘one’ who was in guilt became free from the liability of that guilt.
The original guilty ‘one’ is left right where he was. The main
guilty one was indeed ‘he’ (Chandulal). But ‘You’ (the real self)
had unnecessarily become a partner. Now You have become
straight, have You not? Now that You have become straight,
You will remove Chandulal’s obstinacy. Chandulal’s obstinacy
will not leave as long as there is partnership with You. Now the
partnership is broken and so You will remove Chandulal’s
obstinacy even through scolding, if necessary.
Therefore, the power of this Akram Vignan is such that it
gives you the separation of: ‘The one that is obstinate is not ‘I’;
I am a pure Soul (Shuddhatma).’
Questioner: So the one whom he is trying to improve
does not improve even if he spends his entire life doing so, but
that is not the Self to begin with. Is that how it is?

28

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: Yes, that is why there is no end to it. That is
why one has to wander endlessly life after life.
That is why people said to the Tirthankara Lord, “Dear
Lord, only the most fortunate attain the continuous link, which
you also had received.” The continuous link means that from
here on, one continues to find a path that progresses further and
then a path that moves further from there and then a path even
further from that, and on and on; such a link. It is an unbroken
link. It leads to the end (final liberation)!
Whereas these people do not find such an unbroken link
and they end up way off course.
I, too, had received this continuous link. I searched for
myself trying to find out how all this came about. But that was
because I had received a continuous link and that is why this
whole Akram Vignan has manifested!
Therefore, the approach of ‘The one who is obstinate, is
not ‘I’, is Akram Vignan and ‘I am obstinate and I have to
straighten out,’ is the approach of the traditional Kramic path.
If you become upset and noncompliant, you
will miss the train
Questioner: Is getting upset and non-communicative
(risavu) a form of obstinacy (aadayee)?
Dadashri: Then what else can you call it? Otherwise,
where is the need to be upset and non-communicative (risavu)?
A person cannot refrain from being obstinate. A slightest
disagreement will result in him becoming obstinate (aadayee).
All that is needed is a disagreement.
It is only when one becomes upset and non-communicative
(risavu), that he becomes obstinate! A man’s wife becomes
upset and non-communicative (risavu) at the railway station.
The man pleads with her, ‘Get on the train, otherwise the train
will leave and you will have to spend the night here.’ She would

Aptavani-9

29

not get on and she was stranded. When a person is upset and
non-communicative (risavu), twelve trains will leave without
him. Will the train come and pamper the one who is being upset
in this manner? The world will continue to function; it is not going
to wait for anyone, is it? If a groom’s wedding party is ready to
leave and you become upset and non-compliant, are they likely
to wait for you a couple of days? No, they will not. That is how
the world is.
Questioner: During a wedding one of the paternal uncles
who becomes upset and non-communicative (risavu), will send
a message that he will only come if someone comes to appease
him.
Dadashri: Yes, he will come around when the train is
ready to leave. He has already experienced that the train will
leave without him. The world goes on. Why is one being
obstinate needlessly?
If I am being upset and non-compliant (risavu) with a
train guard or the engine driver, they will ask me, ‘Why are you
being confrontational? Please get on the train.’ And if I remain
stubborn and say, ‘I am not going to get on the train.’ Will they
not just take off? Would the world wait for you? The world will
go on. You have to adjust to it otherwise you will be stranded
at the station. I have seen cases where the guard blows the
whistle and the train leaves without the one who was being
difficult!
Questioner: Then he comes to his senses that the train
has left and he is the loser.
Dadashri: What he believes is ‘I did the right thing.’ If
however, he realizes that he made a mistake in becoming upset
and non-communicative (risavu), then he will not make that
mistake again. However, one does not have that much
understanding. Man does not have the understanding to see his
own loss in this. He does not have that much ability. It requires

30

Aptavani-9

a lot of energy (shakti) to do that. Will a person not question
his actions and second-guess himself when he misses his
scheduled appearance in court that day, after the train has left?
Will he not regret his actions? When you get into a confrontation,
even if you are right and others are wrong, should you not settle
the matter before the train leaves (before it is too late)? Are you
not the greatest fool if you hang on to your side of the story even
when they tell you, ‘Sir, please let go of it now, the other person
made a mistake?’ Then the guard blows his whistle and the train
leaves. This is how the world functions and the fools are left
behind sitting on a bench!
Questioner: But then he also finds a few people who
affirm his action and behavior by saying he did the right thing.
Dadashri: Yes, you will find such people who will say,
‘You said the right thing. Can I get you some tea and snacks?’
People will take away whatever little money you have left. In the
final analysis, there is no joy in this.
If someone were to beat you and push you out of this
Dada’s train, get back on it from the back door if you have to.
Go into the next cabin if they throw you out of this one. If they
throw you out of there, then go to the third cabin, then go to the
fourth and so on. What is the nature of worldly people? They
will remove you from this train, but you should get back into any
other cabin and not miss the train.
Who is the loser?
When I was young, I used to sulk a little once in a while.
Even then, I concluded that there is complete loss in it. It is
nothing but a business of loss. Therefore, I had decided never
to sulk or upset and non-communicative (risavu) again, no
matter what others do. So, I stopped getting upset and noncommunicative (risavu) at a young age. I felt there was a huge
loss in this.
One day when I behaved that way, I lost my share of milk

Aptavani-9

31

for that morning. So I checked further to see what I had lost
during the day and discovered that at the end of the day I gained
nothing and on the contrary I lost out. Later everyone in the
house tried to appease me by giving me a lot of importance but
I lost my morning milk nevertheless. As a child I saw what
happens in becoming upset and non-communicative, and I
concluded that I lost out in doing so; therefore I stopped it all
together. Does a person not lose out?
Questioner: Yes he does.
Dadashri: Now we have become the Self, so this is not
applicable to us anymore. Have you ever become upset and
non-communicative (risavu)? Does anyone become upset and
non-communicative at home?
Questioner: No.
Dadashri: That is good.
Questioner: You said you lost out in your morning milk
because of your obstinacy (aadayee). How old were you?
Dadashri: I was about nine or ten then.
Questioner: But Dada, even we did the same thing. We
too missed our share of milk at that age. We too were left
hungry but we still continued the obstinacy, so how did you
stop?
Dadashri: My morning milk and everything went. I
concluded that all the loss was due to my obstinacy. Obstinacy
is filled with losses, so stop it. One should not be obstinate.
Was all that not obstinacy on my part when I insisted
questioning ‘Why do I get only this much milk?’ Why could I
not just let go and drink it? I thought that maybe I will have my
way the next time. Do you know what I used to tell my mother?
‘Why do you give me half a cup of milk when you give my
sister-in-law half a cup also? Give her less.’ I was happy with

32

Aptavani-9

what I got, I did not want any more, but I wanted my sister-inlaw to have less than me. So what did my mother tell me? ‘Your
mother is here, her mother is not, is she? I have to give her the
same otherwise the poor girl will feel bad.’ I was still not
satisfied. My mother continued to explain things and reason with
me; she kept patching up the situation. However, one day I
became obstinate and lost out and so I decided never to do so
again. Generally people would say, ‘Just let him be.’ Would that
not happen?
Thereafter he never became upset and noncommunicative
Questioner: To instantly recognize a loss is vaniyabuddhi (the intellect of a baniya-business man), is it not?
Dadashri: It is nothing like that. Vaniya-intellect is
vanik-intellect. Vanik-intellect means thoughtful intellect. It is
wise intellect. Having understood the loss, one would never
incur that loss again. Would he?
You lose when you become upset and non-communicative
(risavu). What will others do if you do so, throw a tantrum and
refuse to eat dinner? Will they all stay awake for you? They will
go to sleep when it is time, so you will be the only loser.
What a cycle of becoming upset and non-communicative
(risavu) and the appeasement that follows? And who would
bother pampering and appeasing? When the dinner is ready,
they will call out, ‘Uncle, please come down for dinner. It is
ready and everyone is waiting for you.’ The uncle will say, ‘Go,
I am not coming.’ Would everyone beg him over and over to
come? Would they not start eating without him?
So I never became upset and non-communicative (risavu)
again. Even now, I never become upset and non-communicative
with anyone. Not even with ‘our’ business partner. He used to
become so occasionally, but not seeing any reaction within ‘us’,
he stopped being that way again.

Aptavani-9

33

Only the ‘one’ who reacts sees the one who
is upset and non-communicative.
One man told me, ‘My wife repeatedly becomes very
upset and non-communicative (risavu) with me and will not
speak to me.’ I told him, ‘Who is the one saying ‘she is upset
and non-communicative’?’ It is not ‘You’. It is the risad within
you, i.e. the ‘one’ who is inclined to become upset and noncommunicative that is saying ‘she is upset and non-communicative’;
who is that? It is the ‘one who is the risad’ himself that is
complaining. It is not You. So ‘You’ should ‘know’ (janvoo)
that the ‘one who has reacted and become upset (risad)’ is
seeing all this. The one who is apt to become upset and noncommunicative (risad) is the one seeing the other person who is
upset and non-communicative. The Self ‘sees’ only the Self. It
does not see any other circumstance. Aggravated people see the
one who is aggravated. So I told the man, ‘It was the wife who
was upset and non-communicative, it is not her Self (the Soul
within). She is a woman. And the one who has become upset
in reaction (risad) is not your Self (Atma). Who is the wife upset
and non-communicative (risavu) with? You simply have to ‘see’
that she is upset and non-communicative towards the one who
is himself apt to be sulking (risad). You simply have to see that!
You simply have to keep ‘seeing’.
This can bring a solution, can it not? How can you solve
it otherwise? Some continue becoming upset and noncommunicative (risavu) and others keep cursing. That is how it
is. But the Soul is separate from all these phases; the Soul is not
to be found in any of this. What is the basis on which everything
is taking place? Everything occurs based on each individual’s
karma. A person keeps receiving the fruits of his karma, what
do ‘we’ have to do with that? Each person is enjoying the fruits
of his karma, what do ‘we’ have to do with them? That is how
this is. If you want to attain the Self, then keep seeing the Self
in others, and nothing else is worth seeing.

34

Aptavani-9

What is within ‘our’ understanding? Is there not a
difference between your understanding and ‘ours’? ‘We’ are not
affected by any pain or misery; what is the reason behind this?
It is because ‘our’ understanding is within ‘us’. ‘We’ do not
drag in any ignorance (agnan) from outside, whereas others
drag in worldly understanding (agnan) from others. What do we
have to do with others? Everything is under the control of
vyavasthit (scientific circumstantial evidences). It is a karmic
account. Nothing is going to be changed in this account. Can
any changes in the ‘book’ of karmic accounts be made from the
outside? Then what is all this fuss about? And if the wife is upset
and non-communicative (risavu), only the one who reacts (the
risad) to this can see her as being so. The Self would not see
the one who becomes upset and non-communicative. Only the
one prone to be upset in reaction (risad) will see it as such. The
risad is the one seeing the one who is upset. Otherwise, how
can one see the one who is upset? Do you think people who
come to me do not become upset and non-communicative? But
I do not see anyone as being upset. Will you not have to account
and arrive at the correct understanding for all this? Do you not
have to account for all this?
The unique method of vitaragata (the state
of non-attachment)
Questioner: How do you deal with someone who
becomes upset and non-communicative (risavu) with you?
Dadashri: With complete vitarag-bhaav; complete nonattachment from within, along with the deep inner intent of
salvation of that person. ‘We’ do not have any inner insistence
of any kind. There is no intention of appeasing anyone either. If
‘we’ feel that in trying to appease the other person it will have
a contrary effect, then ‘we’ would not say anything. If it is going
to have a positive effect, then ‘we’ will say a few words to him,
‘Sir, ‘we’ made a mistake, please be patient. We are all prone
to mistakes.’ ‘We’ would explain things to him in this way and

Aptavani-9

35

pacify him. However there would be no insistence on ‘our’ part,
there is complete vitaragata within. Constant vitaragata
(detachment)! There would not be the least bit of pull (bhaav)
towards him or repulsion (abhaav) away from him. And then
we have to tell ‘Dada Bhagwan’, ‘Please grace this man.’ Then,
to the pure Soul, which is separate from ‘Chandulal and
‘Chandulal’s’ mind-body-speech, bhaavkarma-dravyakarmanokarma’ ‘we’ request, ‘please shower Your grace on
‘Chandulal’. I make all these connections. Then I remain vitarag
(detached). The other person continues to remain upset and
non-communicative (risavu) and I remain straight. This worldly
interaction continues. He becomes perplexed for a while and
then it all goes away.
Questioner: Then, Dada, is it not true that a man who is
apt to resorting to becoming upset and non-communicative
(risavu), will automatically stop if he does not get any
encouragement for such a behavior?
Dadashri: ‘We’ never encourage such people, not even
a little. Encouragement has a negative effect on such individuals.
Even children will improve if you remain vitarag with them
but by encouraging their upset and non-communicative behavior,
they will get on the wrong path. You need vitaragata (detached
interaction)! Treat them with tender care if they come to you and
do not react if they do not. If they come, hug them gently and
if they get agitated just leave them alone. Then if they come
again, hug them again. You should not concern yourself with the
way they are behaving; you simply have to remain vitarag.
Whatever they do, you should not be concerned about it and
neither should you make a deep mental note (nondha) of it.
Questioner: That is a tremendous thing, Dada.
Dadashri: There should be no deep mental note (nondha)
whatsoever. Nondha creates conflicts. Do not make a mental
note of anyone. We scold all these people but ‘we’ never make

36

Aptavani-9

any note of it. ‘We’ would go crazy if I were to make any note
at all. ‘We’ got rid of the notebook altogether long ago!
Vitarag and yet meddlesome
Questioner: Dada, is there any nishkaran karuna
(expectation-free compassion; compassion of the Gnani Purush
for us that has no ‘personal gain’ agenda behind it) in the eyes
of the vitarag?
Dadashri: Yes, just that! What else? This is nothing but
compassion without expectation (ultimate compassion)! Our
vision is only on his Self (Soul) and not his non-Self complex
(pudgal). Nevertheless, ‘we’ will preserve and promote a
worldly relationship with him because he is beneficial to the
satsang and therefore ‘we’ would say, ‘welcome, please.’ If
there are certain people who are beneficial for others, ‘we’ will
make it a point to welcome them and encourage them. That
worldly dealing has to be taken care of and nurtured and ‘we’
would do that. The tirthankara Lords however, would not do
such things. They do not meddle whatsoever, do they? And this
is nothing but meddling (khatpat) on ‘our’ part.
Questioner: It is because the meddling part for the
world’s salvation that still remains in you, that we are able to
come to you here.
Dadashri: Yes, that is it. That is why ‘we’ have halted
‘our’ progress towards final liberation. May others attain the
salvation that ‘we’ have acquired and that is why ‘we’ meddle;
‘we’ meddle only for this reason. Everything ‘we’ do is simply
so that people too may be blessed. People get to see vitaragata
(the detached state) here.
Questioner: So far you mentioned obstinacy in your
worldly interaction (vyavahar), where you became upset and
non-communicative (risavu) over milk, but what kind of
obstinacy is there on the path of moksha?

Aptavani-9

37

Dadashri: All this is nothing but obstinacy on the path to
moksha and that is why the worldly life continues to perpetuate;
that is why people cannot attain moksha. Otherwise, your
liberation is at hand right here only! Obstinacy is the wall of
obstruction to liberation. The obstinacy is still there; a bundle of
sheer obstinacy; that is what he is! He will do only what he
wants to.
That is called tragu - manipulative tantrum
Questioner: Is making another person do what you
want, considered part of obstinacy (aadayee)?
Dadashri: Then what else? If it is not obstinacy
(aadayee) than what is it? One gets his way through becoming
upset and noncompliant. If not then ultimately through a
manipulative tantrum (tragu) one will have his or her way. One
may even end up throwing a tragu to have his own way. Have
you ever seen a tragu? You will get a fever if you saw one. If
someone does a tragu, your temperature will rise three degrees
even if you do not have a fever!
Questioner: What is a tragu?
Dadashri: Tragu means a person does whatever is
necessary to scare you into accepting his or her own way. That
person will do anything to make you accept his will. He will
bang his head on the wall, hit this or that part on the wall, jump
around, cry loudly, wail, throw a tantrum etc. That which
completely scares us from all angles is a tragu.
Questioner: What is the difference between doing a
tragu and pretending?
Dadashri: Whether one is pretending or throwing a
manipulative tantrum (tragu), he is doing it in order to get his
own way.
If everyone is sitting down for dinner and one person
says, ‘I am not going to eat’ - he is an important person in the

38

Aptavani-9

party and his stance is one that creates apprehension in the
party; that is called a tragu. The caring people around him will
say, ‘Please come and join us, we would like your company.’
They will feed him. But if they were to ignore him, he would eat
on his own. No one has starved to death.
That is not a tragu - manipulative tantrum
Questioner: Someone locks himself in a room when he
gets upset. Everyone else in the home becomes restless but he
will not open the door. Is that a tragu?
Dadashri: That is not a tragu. That is obstinacy
(aadayee); tragu is a different thing.
Questioner: Is it a tragu when one pounds his fists on
his chest or bang his head on a wall?
Dadashri: When people bang their heads, some of it is
aadayee and some of it is a tragu. The word tragu is
something very different; in a tragu the one doing the tragu is
not affected by it at all. In aadayee, that person continues to
experience internal suffering. Simply put, tragu is pure acting!
Locking one’s self in a room is obstinacy. In a tragu, the person
cries and shouts but remains unperturbed from within. Locking
one’s self in a room and scaring family members is all obstinacy.
She suffers and makes others around her suffer too. In a tragu,
she herself is not affected and yet she does a tragu; that is
tragu! We need a definition, do we not? Surely you cannot label
any action as a tragu, can you?
Keep your distance from manipulative
tantrum (tragu)
Tragu does tremendous damage.
Questioner: Can you explain tragu with an example?
Dadashri: Can you not tell when someone is doing a
tragu? You may not know how to do a tragu but can you not
tell when someone is doing it?

Aptavani-9

39

Questioner: Is insisting on the truth (satyagraha), a
tragu?
Dadashri: That is one kind of a mild tragu for sure, but
for that one can use words or terms that are more ornamental
and suitable. People use the ornamental word ‘satyagraha’.
But as far as a tragu (manipulative tantrum) is concerned, no
one will call it satyagraha, will they?
In short, a tragu means to force others into doing what
you want when they are not willing to do so. One resorts to
tragu in order to scare and manipulate others into ultimately
doing what he wants. He will invoke fear in others, he invokes
fear by doing something one way or another; he resorts to
emotional blackmail in this manipulative behavior to attain his
calculated desired end.
Questioner: He will make one do what he wants,
through using his charm, money, and punishment, even the fear
of separation.
Dadashri: Yes, but he will not stop until he has his way;
that is a tragu. I had witnessed such tragu several times but I
paid my respect from afar, ‘Hey! Tragu may I never see you
and the doer of the tragu, let me not see your face ever.’ Tragu
is a learnt behavior. One will even find a guru to teach him.
Tragu is not something one can learn on his own.
Questioner: So if a person insists on doing things his
way, is that called tragu?
Dadashri: Insistence is not tragu but to scare others into
doing what one wants, that is tragu. Don’t some people scare
others by saying, ‘…or else I will commit suicide’ or ‘I’ll do
this’ or ‘I’ll do that’?
Questioner: They threaten, they charm, and they incite
pity or punishment; they do whatever it takes.
Dadashri: Yes, they resort to every trick. And what do

40

Aptavani-9

the poor straight people do? They will say, ‘Let him have his
way, whatever may become of us, so be it.’ The poor wife will
even give up all her jewelry.
Questioner: The one who does the tragu, does so with
an understanding, does he not?
Dadashri: He understands everything. Tragu means to
willfully and knowingly manipulate for one’s own agenda.
Consequences of a tragu
Questioner: What are the consequences for doing
tragu?
Dadashri: One completely bypasses the entire Tiryancha
Gati (the animal life form), i.e. in the next life he will go directly
to hell. Is it an ordinary feat to by-pass the entire subhuman
life?!!
Questioner: Is that considered raudradhyan (adverse
internal meditation that hurts the self as well as others)?
Dadashri: In many ways, raudradhyan is better. So if
anyone here has made the mistake of doing a tragu, come and
ask for forgiveness from ‘us’. If you do this several times, you
may erase one or so of this fault. It is considered a very grave
wrongdoing. One bypasses the entire sub-human life form and
goes straight to hell. What is more, it will not be the hell one is
born into for doing raudradhyan either. Through tragu, people
put others through living hell all the while getting what they want,
at any cost. At all cost, meaning no matter what may happen,
one will not rest until one gets what one wants.
In opposing the one doing a tragu
(manipulative tantrum)
Questioner: In the current time-cycle, such tragas are
occurring everywhere.
Dadashri: No, not everywhere, those are smaller tragas.

Aptavani-9

41

These tragas on the other hand are very serious; they will even
bang their heads in front of you. One person started such a
tragu in my presence, so I told him, ‘Go to Mahadevji (Lord
Shiva) and offer your head as a sacrifice. Why are you doing it
here? This ‘Dada is the Mahadevji of Mahadevji i.e. Lord of the
Lords. Even if you do million such tragas here, they will not
have any effect, such is this man.’ Even before Gnan I used to
say, ‘Even if you do a million tragas in front me, it will not move
me a bit. I am such a man.’
This art of tragu (manipulative tantrum) is very distressing.
‘We’ keep away from it. ‘We’ are telling you so because ‘we’
have seen it.
Questioner: When two parties are resorting to
manipulative tantrums, what should we do with reference to
dispensing justice in the matter?
Dadashri: ‘We’ would not get involved in that. When it
comes to a tragu, ‘we’ stay away.
Questioner: No, but if a question about making a
judgment arises, then what should one do?
Dadashri: Arey! Even the one passing a judgment risks
bypassing the subhuman life. If someone ever does a tragu in
front of me, he will realize it was a mistake to do so; he will
never do it again! He will realize that it is a liability to do a
tragu.
Do you know what one lady who used to do tragu, told
me? She told me that of all the people she had come across with
whom she had had her way; I was the only one with whom she
had not been able to have her own way. I told her that I have
a thorough understanding of people like her.
Questioner: One has to learn to deal with an upper hand
with a person doing a tragu, with a technique of remaining
unaffected. That is an art too!

42

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: That ‘we’ know! But it is still not worth getting
involved. ‘We’ get involved only when it is unavoidable.
Otherwise, it is not worth initiating. ‘We’ have seen tragas in
other places too. A husband would drag his wife by her hair and
bring her to me looking for justice. The wife and the husband,
both would do tragas, both were manipulative. Therefore, ‘we’
have seen a lot of this. It is a wide world. What colors have
‘we’ not seen in it?
It is a tragu when everyone around has been pressured
to succumb against their wishes. Just as surrendering to officers
of the law, people have to surrender there too; that is a tragu.
Questioner: Meaning one puts others in a tight grip,
correct?
Dadashri: Yes, they put them in such a hold.
Questioner: How should we act towards the one doing
a tragu?
Dadashri: You should ask him: Why he is doing it? For
what happiness is he doing it? How long can happiness that has
been stolen from others, remain with him?
Questioner: What should one do if he still does not
understand?
Dadashri: Then move away from there.
Questioner: So give into him?
Dadashri: It is the same as giving in. It is a way of moving
away from the situation, is it not? So move away from him. If a
snake comes after you, who has to run away from the snake, you
or the snake? You have to run away. What does the snake have
to lose? If a bull chases you, are you going to say, ‘Why are you
chasing me?’ Are you going to stand there and say, ‘I am a
lawyer from Baroda’? The bull will chase even a king!
Questioner: But you did not give in to people who did

Aptavani-9

43

tragu and you told them that you have taken on many people
like him without being affected. So how is that?
Dadashri: In some situations, ‘we’ have also given in, only
because by doing so, that poor fellow will somehow get back on
the right track. It is only with this intent that ‘we’ have done so.
That is shameless open blackmail (naagai)
Lawyers too meet people who do tragu. Even lawyers
will say, ‘Let me run away from him’, when they meet such
people. What will the lawyer tell such a client? He will say, ‘I
will fight your case. You don’t have to pay me.’ So there are all
kinds of people.
Questioner: Many times even the lawyer does a tragu.
He will tell you at the last minute to give him money or he will
not appear in court.
Dadashri: No, that is not a tragu; it is an issue of mutual
selfish needs.
Questioner: Even after he has been paid for his service
he does it to extort more money.
Dadashri: Yes, he will do that too, still it is not a tragu.
It is shamelessness and open blackmail (naagai). You can deal
with shameless people and even win but dealing with those who
do tragu will make you by-pass the subhuman life form and go
directly into hell. Lawyers say shameless things and so do their
clients. The client may say, ‘Sir I have paid your fees. I have not
forgotten to pay. In fact you were standing with several people
when I paid you.’ Now what can the lawyer do when the client
counter attacks him in this way? What can the lawyer do, after
all he is human too!
Dealing with taipho
One woman started a tragu when one of my relative was
visiting me. He got very scared and told her, ‘Hey, hey! You

44

Aptavani-9

should not do that.’ I told him, ‘No, let her act up. Let us have
our tea and you can watch her. It is something to watch. It is
great!’ The woman stopped immediately when I said this and
asked me ‘Are you doing my taipho (exposing me)?’ I told her,
‘You are doing a taipho, so we have to see the taipho, don’t
we? What else can we do?’
Questioner: If we use the word taipho to the one doing
a taipho, then we will get double the beating.
Dadashri: If that is the case then you should not use the
word taipho. You should take it a little slow at first. I too took
things very slowly at first, and then I became increasingly stern.
I tightened the screw as she started to say more unwarranted
things and so she mellowed down later.
People can be saved from a taipho but not from a tragu.
Many people have been destroyed because of tragu. Even
some men do tragu.

Tragu for salvation of the world
A person does tragu when he cannot have his way.
Anything you do to make others do things your way is a tragu.
When one resorts to whatever it takes, including scare tactics to
achieve his will and desired result; is all tragu. Throwing things,
creating a commotion, fighting and beating, is all tragu. The one
who is meek and mild will get scared very easily and give in.
‘We’ did tragu once. Arey! I threw things on the floor;
I threw utensils, containers of sugar, tea, cooking fuel etc. I
made a big mess. There was a big mess on the floor.
Questioner: Was it to have your own way?
Dadashri: Yes, that was the only tragu I did in my whole
life. It is called a tragu. It was done for asserting control. And
it was done for others; it was done for the sake of dharma, not
for me. It was done because ‘we’ had to convey to Hiraba,
‘You should not act this way.’

Aptavani-9

45

This is what happened. After ‘we’ attained Gnan, young
girls used to come to ‘us’ for vidhis (special spiritual blessing
from the Gnani Purush by touching His feet) when we lived in
Mamani Poda in Vadodara. Hiraba was innocent; she is a good
person. But women in the house across from ours instigated her
by telling her, ‘Oh my goodness! Young girls come to Dada and
touch his feet. It looks bad. It is not appropriate, is it? Dada is
a good man, but this looks bad. What about Dada’s reputation?’
People made all kinds of innuendos and brainwashed Hiraba
in this way. She worried that our reputation would be ruined.
She is a good woman but people put ‘salt’ in her (they instilled
suspicion in her mind). What happens to milk when you put
salt in it?
Questioner: It will go bad.
Dadashri: I knew that people had started to add ‘salt’ in
her and that one-day she would go ‘bad’, but I waited. One day
when a young lady was doing vidhi, Hiraba deliberately hit the
door as she was sweeping the floor. She had never done that
before. There was no such practice in our home. She did it to
scare the girl away; she did not do it to scare me. The girls
became anxious that Hiraba would scold them. So this girl got
scared. I immediately understood that there was some kind of
mischief behind this act; can one not recognize the mischief
behind it? Do you think that I was as naive back then as I am
now? So then, I told Hiraba, ‘From today onwards you and I
have to separate. We cannot afford this. You go and live in
Bhadran. I will arrange to send you seven hundred or so rupees
every month for your expenses. We should no longer be staying
together from now on.’ Chandulal and five or six other people
were sitting there at the time. Even they got the opportunity to
learn from this scene! Hiraba then started to make tea and while
doing so, she kept banging the stove. I said to myself ‘I will have
to tighten the screw before this gets out of control.’ So I went
into the kitchen and started to throw cans of tea, sugar, oil,

46

Aptavani-9

kerosene etc., on the floor. It was as if a 400-volt current had
touched it all. I made a mess of everything. The women who had
instigated Hiraba came to see what was going on. I asked them,
‘Who poisoned this Goddess of a woman?’ They responded,
‘You are a Gnani, you cannot become angry like this.’ Well only
the anger of the Gnani Purush is worth seeing. I then told them,
‘It is your instigation that has created this situation. Why did you
feed her all this? What have we done to you?’ They responded,
‘We did not feed her anything. We simply told her a few things.’
I asked them, ‘Why did you have to ruin her life?’ They replied,
‘How have we ruined her life?’ I told them, ‘Now she has to live
alone. Hiraba has to live separate in a new home in Bhadran. I
will give her a monthly allowance.’ They said, ‘you cannot do
that. How can you do that at this age?’ I asked them, ‘what
good is a pot that has a crack in it? It will not hold water
anymore; whatever you put in it will drain out. Can you keep a
pot with a crack in it?’ The neighbors all got worried when they
realized that Hiraba would have to go live separately. Yes, there
should not be any negative effect on dharma; Atma dharma –
in spiritual matters regarding the Soul.
That day tea, sugar and everything else were all mixed up.
But that act was carried out without any attachment or
abhorrence (vitarag-bhaav); or any inner reaction. I told
Chandulal and the others sitting there, ‘go home and learn.’
What was the outcome of this act the next day? The women
started telling Hiraba ‘Don’t do anything to cause problems. Let
whoever wants to come and see Dada. You do not get involved
in it.’ They started to tell her just the opposite because they got
worried that they would be blamed if anything were to happen.
They knew they had to be very careful. I had created that scene
in order to ensure that they would never do what they did again.
I have never had to repeat that act either. I had come up with
that much remedy. They may still remember the incident. Hiraba
too was swept up in the rut. She would have never behaved that

Aptavani-9

47

way on her own accord, it was the other women who led her
to believe that if she behaved this way, the girls would go away
and never return.
The presence of a Gnani is very rare in this world. Would
the poor girls not come to do darshan? They come here
because they do not find peace elsewhere. At least let them do
darshan peacefully. Those women even told Hiraba that Dada
would marry one of the girls! They also coached Hiraba that
these young girls would take Dada away from her. Arey! How
can that happen? I am an old man, what kind of nonsense were
they teaching Hiraba? What fault is it of poor Hiraba? She too
realized she was wrong. Although the girls used to come to
satsang, she was one hundred percent convinced that I was
morally upright and sincere, but she told me to stop because it
looked bad to others. Is it possible to leave this role of the
Gnani even if I wanted to? This is all vyavasthit and she said it
out of lack of understanding. Is it even possible to do? Besides
can this ‘railway’ line – this path of Akram Vignan - be just
plucked up and removed? Therefore, I had to find a solution.
An ordinary ‘cork’ would not have worked; I had to look for
a ‘cork’ that could be screwed on so tight that it would never
come off! (Dada had to resolve the situation once and for all).
Questioner: The acting you did, is that not considered
deceit (kapat)?
Dadashri: No. There is no deceit (kapat) in it. There is
no deceit in removing heat from under the milk when it is about
to boil over. Is there deceit in that?
Questioner: But the aim was to do something good, is it
not?
Dadashri: It was to cleanse her. Everyone sitting around
were stunned. Besides I would only assail her reputation in the
presence of others, otherwise I would not even attempt it; it
would not have any affect on her. Otherwise she would swallow

48

Aptavani-9

the insult. She will think, ‘Oh! No one was present!’ She would
have just swallowed it and my effort would have gone to waste.
Hiraba had the experience and knew that I was moral and
sincere. It was only in this one case that her mind became
poisoned and it became a little difficult to remove the impurity.
The impurity did not come out by way of gentle words and so
I had to resort to this other method. Further more this remedy
was such that whenever Hiraba went to do something, she
would say, ‘Do not do that. We must not interfere in what he is
doing. He is very strict. He is just like Mahadevji (referring to
the angry form of Lord Shiva).’ This big an impression I left on
her. Hiraba says, ‘Even now he is like a hot chili pepper!’
It is not easy to be a Gnani. If a sprout like this were to
germinate in someone, the Gnani would remove that sprout from
its very roots; otherwise it would grow into trees! The women
then used to tell Hiraba, ‘Do not say anything. You should not
say anything.’ I reassured Hiraba, ‘I am not going to do
anything. Who is going to do anything to Dada? What are these
girls going to do?’ Those women then realized, ‘Why should we
take on the quarrel unnecessarily. We will be held liable for it.’
I told the women directly on their face they were responsible for
creating the entire problem. What could be done now that the
pot had a crack in it (a crack in the relation)? I told them I will
patch the crack just this one time but I would not do it again and
that the next time I would just leave Hiraba. I sealed the crack
one time.
Questioner: Hiraba’s banging on the door and slamming
the stove, is that obstinacy (aadayee)?
Dadashri: Then what is it if not obstinacy? But it is
actually a tragu. It was a tragu on a smaller level. I did the big,
heavy one!
Questioner: So does one have to use force like that in
order to be rid of the smaller tragu?

Aptavani-9

49

Dadashri: Yes, ‘we’ had deliberately done the tragu and
she did the tragu according to her karma. ‘We’ did it on
purpose, all the while remaining in the Gnan. There were five or
ten mahatmas sitting there, one of them told me, ‘How can you
do something like this?’ so ‘we’ replied, ‘Learn, Let me teach
you. Just sit there quietly. ‘We’ are teaching you a lesson. What
method will you employ when your wife causes problems for
you at home?’
Questioner: You said that you did it while remaining in
Gnan. Can you tell us how to remain in Gnan while doing it?
Dadashri: Just by this Gnan; the Gnan that ‘Ambalal is
the doer’. Is the Gnan married to Hiraba? Besides, just look
how we (Dada and Hiraba) spent all the years without matbhed
(separation due to differences in opinion). Even now, ‘we’ stop
any separation due to differences of opinion even before they
arise. Later Hiraba even took Gnan again. Then ‘Dada’ came
into her dream.
Otherwise, ‘we’ have not been ill-at-ease with anyone for
the past forty years. ‘We’ have not raised our voice or been
irritated with anyone for forty years! People too recognize and
understood this. They even say that I am like God.

Tragu, is an art too
Tragu is an art; it is one of the seventy-two arts.
Questioner: Is stealing also not an art (kada)?
Dadashri: Yes, that is also an art but all these arts that
one has acquired (from past life) are what create problems in
this life.
Questioner: Where does one learn the art of tragu?
Dadashri: The soul has all kinds of energies. When a
person decides, ‘I will get what I want through scaring others’,

50

Aptavani-9

then he will know how to do a tragu. He will then know how
to get his way through tragu.
One needs a lot of cleverness (akkal) to do a tragu.
Most people are not smart enough to understand or recognize
a tragu. If someone is doing a tragu, ‘we’ would know it right
away. It is no fun to deal with one who comes and does a tragu
here.
Questioner: Can you recognize when one does tragu?
Dadashri: ‘We’ recognize it the moment one resorts to
a tragu ‘here comes tragu! He has started doing a tragu!’
Vigilance with understanding
A ten-year-old son of one of our acquaintance would
start crying and wailing as soon as his mother became free from
her household chores. I had to sleep in the room next to his. He
would do this every day, so one day, when he was alone, I went
in his room and pinched him a few times and he started to
scream. His mother became exasperated, ‘This cry-baby
harasses me everyday.’ I said, ‘No he is not harassing you. Just
listen to the wonderful sound he is producing. This is music. Just
listen. Call everyone to listen.’ This went on for two or three
more days and then it stopped.
We have to come up with some remedy, do we not? How
long can this go on? People use tragu to scare others. Just one
person with a tragu can scare and ruin hundred others.
They can do such a tragu that will take the wind out of
you and drain you emotionally. Being a Gnani, Gnan helps ‘us’
realize that a person is doing tragu. Even when I did not have
Gnan, I could assess a person from every angle and immediately
tell why he is doing it and what his intent is behind his tragu. I
would tell him right away ‘Have a seat. We are having some tea
right now.’ By that time his mind would calm down and even he
would get tense.

Aptavani-9

51

Tragu became a heavy liability for a lady
There was a woman at my friend’s home. She was either
his relative or his elder sister. One day she used heavy deception
(kapat) in order to bully my friend. When someone was visiting
him, she became hysterical and started hitting herself. This
scared my friend and the other man. My friend told me what had
happened when he met me. I told him, ‘I will come to your
house next time this happens.’ Then one day I went there and
she performed the same ‘show’ (taipho; open exposition of
tragu)! She did a tragu! She would jump and my friend would
get scared. So I asked that lady, ‘Do you enjoy all this? You
jump very well. Why don’t you jump some more? We enjoy it
very much.’ I said something like this and she started cursing at
me, ‘Why did you come to our house?’
Therefore, ‘we’ know such deceitful acts and ‘we’ have
the keys to deal with them. Very few people do tragu; about
two percent of men do tragu and in women it is about ten
percent. Tragu is more prevalent in women.
Did you get the meaning of tragu? Only people in the old
days knew how to do them. I feel the children of today do not
know how to do them. How would they know? Their overall
makeup is not strong enough; they are weaklings. Those who do
tragas have a very aggressive constitution. Young people today
get nervous at the slightest scare.
Ingrained in the prakruti
Questioner: Does the one doing a tragu realize that he
is doing it?
Dadashri: Definitely! Tragu itself means to do according
to one’s wishes. It has become an ingrained part of one’s
prakruti and therefore the owner is not able to discern whether
his action is beneficial to him or not. But she knows and
understands everything. Why would she not? When one can
understand even the smallest of things, tragu is a major thing.

52

Aptavani-9

Beware of those doing tragu!
One lady came to me and started doing a tragu. She was
a respectable lady, elder to me. I did not give into her tragu.
Then she tells me, ‘You are the only one who has not
succumbed to me.’ I told her, ‘It is not that I do not yield. I
would not yield to God either in such matters.’ This is because
whenever she initiated a tragu, I would know it immediately.
Tragu means to scare the other person to death. ‘We’
became a Gnani recently but prior to that I had an ego, did I
not? At that time I would say, ‘Go ahead and bang your head;
let me see you do that. Are you trying to scare me? I sit here
having scared the whole world.’ I am such a man that I can get
rid of the tragas of the whole world. I am such a magician!
People doing tragu will not let you get ahead in life. To do
tragu means to put a lot of pressure on others.
I was visiting a man when another man came to him. Do
you know what he started to do in order to scare him? He
started to bang his head on the ground and so I asked him, ‘Hey
Brother! What is the matter? What is wrong?’ So the other man
said, ‘Look, he does this to scare me.’ Soft and mild people get
scared easily. If a person refuses to sign certain documents, then
the other man will do tragu to scare him into signing them. The
man will then say, ‘Here, give the papers to me, I will sign them.’
Therefore, a man doing tragu will bang his head on the wall in
this way.
What is a bad quality in men? It is that of doing a tragu.
Do not have any relation with a man who does tragu. Women
by nature may do tragu, but some men do tragu too.
Questioner: You said that a bad quality in a man is that
of tragu and that we should not interact with such a person?
Dadashri: No, you should not. He will scare you too.
You too will get scared.

Aptavani-9

53

Questioner: How can one escape from such a man who
is doing a tragu?
Dadashri: I know how to escape from a woman doing
a tragu, but I do not know how to escape from a man doing
one. I would make the woman doing a tragu jump all night long.
But I too become startled when a man does tragu.
Tragu means to create a major uproar in order to attain
something against the wishes of others. ‘I am going to commit
suicide; I am going to do this. I am going to do that.’ One will
get his way through whatever means necessary. He will do any
kind of tragu to scare you. There are such men.
Questioner: If a man does a tragu by saying, ‘I am
going to run away, I am going to kill myself, I am going to do
this’, should we believe that he will really carry out his threats?
Would he do that?
Dadashri: Do not get scared but remain vigilant. He may
even proceed to do so. Most of it is just tragu and so he will
not do anything; nevertheless it is still better to be vigilant.
There are many who do tragu in their worldly interactions.
When it comes to interactions in the home, you should not let
yourself be affected by anyone doing tragu, otherwise you will
suffer heavily. My whole life I have avoided tragas. I had one
such ‘system’ of not being affected; that always saved me from
tragas. But on the most part, the world has been intimidated by
and has yielded to tragas.
Questioner: How should one behave when a person is
doing tragu?
Dadashri: How does it concern you in any way? Just
continue ‘seeing’ it. You will get to see a new play. Otherwise,
where can you get the opportunity to see such a play? If you ask
an actor to do tragu, is he likely to do so? So, you should tell
the person doing the tragu, ‘go ahead and do as many tragas
as you want!’

54

Aptavani-9

Adjustment to save yourself
‘We’ have not seen many tragas but those that ‘we’ have
were unpleasant and distressing for all those who were around.
Questioner: So how do you feel when someone does
tragu in front of you?
Dadashri: ‘We’ would immediately recognize that she
has started a tragu.
Questioner: What do you do at that time?
Dadashri: ‘We’ do not give into her. Even if all of you
were to do a tragu, I would just sit here. You will get tired but
not me. I have become an expert at it.
Questioner: What kind of adjustment do you take from
within?
Dadashri: Unaffected! Without any effects whatsoever!
Let her do a tragu, she will get tired and go to sleep!
Questioner: But would she not do more tragu, Dada?
When she sees that you are unaffected, would she then not act
up even more to affect you?
Dadashri: Yes and ‘our’ internal state of being unaffected
will become even stronger! That is how much energy there is
within ‘us’. In what situations would ‘we’ let go? In situations
where the person is making a reasonable request or is having
reasonable feeling and emotion, but if she does it as a scare
tactic, then ‘we’ will not yield. Are you trying to scare me? Even
God is not able to scare me. Are you not ashamed? Are you
trying to scare the one who has pleased God in every way?
Some people do tragu in front of me, but they are minor
tragas.
Questioner: Then do you not say anything to her? Do
you just remain silent and sit unaffected?

Aptavani-9

55

Dadashri: What else can ‘he (Ambalal)’ do? What can
you tell the one doing a tragu?
Questioner: She will realize that nothing affects ‘Dada’.
Dadashri: She will realize everything. This ‘Dada’ is a
very shrewd man. Otherwise, can he run such a large
organization? There would be quarrels everyday. But just look!
There are no rules here and the law here is one of ‘no law-law’;
does everything still not run smoothly? If ‘we’ do not see
ultimate humility (param vinay) in a person, ‘we’ will keep a
stern watch over him and if he does not maintain humility
(vinay), then ‘we’ will ask him to ‘get out’. But ‘we’ would not
tell him in a manner that would create enmity. It would be done
gently and with humility. Dada is happy only where there is
ultimate humility.
‘We’ have come here to turn people around. ‘We’ do not
need anything from this world. One goes through immense
misery because he is on the wrong path. While taking the wrong
path he incurs additional liability for his actions. It is a different
matter if there was no suffering and he was enjoying it. But one
goes through so much misery and on top of that he incurs
tremendous liability for being on the wrong path. Therefore; out
of compassion for him, ‘we’ ask, ‘why are you heading on the
wrong path?’

* * * * *

56

Aptavani-9

[2]
Udvega (emotional agitation) : Shanka
(suspicion) : Nondha (making a deep intense
mental note)
Against emotional agitation : udvega
So become straight (sarad) like a child if you want to
attain moksha. A child does things without any understanding
and the Gnani Purush does it with an understanding that is all.
Both are childlike and innocent. Does the worldly life not
continue for a child even though he has no worldly understanding?
The child’s life runs very well. In fact, his worldly life gets worse
as he begins to understand. The Gnani Purush is straight (sarad)
like a child. Obstinacy (aadayee) is a form of ego; an ego that
says I don’t want to be straight and I want to do it my way.
Obstinacy is a result of wanting to have one’s own way.
Obstinacy will go away in a person who does things according
to the will of others.
Questioner: When events do not occur as one has
planned and willed; he becomes agitated and emotional (udvega).
Dadashri: Events never occur as one wishes. Therefore,
before throwing the dice just think that they are going to fall the
wrong way. Thereafter, whichever dice falls the right way, is
correct. But if we say that all four must fall my way, then that
day will never come and there will be entanglements, uneasiness,
and emotional agitation (udvega). Instead, by saying in advance,
‘all four of you fall the wrong way’ then when one or two fall
the right way, you will be pleased with the results and feel easy.
So the value is in making the right internal adjustments.

Aptavani-9

57

Questioner: Dada, it is a hundred percent fact that such
an adjustment is only possible if one has this Akram Vignan.
Otherwise it is impossible.
Dadashri: Yes, otherwise it is impossible; such adjustment
would not remain, what support could it have? In those
situations, whatever adjustment one takes will be blown away
and he will become distraught and restless. Then he will walk
around looking as if he just drank some castor oil!
Questioner: You just said for us to think that the dice
should fall the wrong way, when we throw them. Why should
one even have such expectation of a negative result?
Dadashri: Then what should you expect instead?
Questioner: We should not have any expectations;
whatever comes is correct.
Dadashri: It is good if your mind agrees to ‘whatever
way the dice falls is correct’ then it is a good thing. And when
the mind is dissatisfied with the result, then you have to say, ‘all
of you fall the wrong way.’ Then you will be content even when
just two of the four fall the right way. So it all depends on the
kind of mind you have.
Where there is no expectation, there is no
emotional agitation
If you make a deal on the phone with someone in
Bombay and then two days later he changes his mind, you will
experience emotional agitation (udvega) but the other person
will not. Why should you be the one to experience emotional
agitation (udvega)? You are in your dharma (keeping your side
of the deal) and the other person is in adharma (doing wrong)
by changing his mind. Why should you be agitated when you
have done nothing wrong? A person may argue, ‘But I lost the
profit, did I not?’ You fool! You have never had a profit, so why
not let it go? Just believe that you never made a deal in the first

58

Aptavani-9

place. But instead he becomes emotionally agitated and his wife
will ask, ‘What happened? Why are you like this?’ There is
nothing but udvega, udvega, udvega, udvega! That which was
supposed to flow down towards calmness has gone up towards
emotional agitation. If the other person backed out after making
the deal, what is the harm? Just think that you never made the
deal in the first place. Instead, one gets trapped in udvega.
What does everyone do? While sustaining one loss, they
create two more. The Gnani Purush lets only one loss go.
Questioner: When a person experiences emotional
agitation (udvega), is it not due to moha (attachment due to
illusion)?
Dadashri: When one loses ten thousand rupees in a deal,
there is moha behind it. He has already incurred one loss, why
fret over it? Why double the loss? There was only one loss
written in the effect of his karma, so why take another loss? Is
it better to incur one or two losses? Just one, but every one
incurs two losses and then he binds the same karma again for
his next life.
Why should there be even a moment of udvega? Udvega
binds much karma. ‘We’ have not experienced even a moment
of emotional agitation (udvega) since ‘we’ attained this Gnan
Motion (Vega), emotion (Aavega) and
emotional agitation (udvega)
Questioner: Please explain vega, aavega and udvega?
Dadashri: Vega (motion) is a natural phenomenon and
aavega is unnatural. When one becomes the ‘doer’ (I am
Chandulal), he becomes emotional (aavega). Emotional agitation
(udvega) occurs even when one does not want it to. Emotional
agitation (udvega) occurs against one’s wishes and it is strong
enough to crack open his head! The head feels as if it is going
to explode! Even the Gnani is subject to vega, however He
does not have aavega and absolutely no udvega.

Aptavani-9

59

As long as one is a doer (of aavega), there is no telling
when it will give rise to emotional agitation (udvega). Yes, once
doer-ship leaves, emotional agitation (udvega) will leave for
sure. Udvega will not occur once the belief of doer-ship is
destroyed. Nevertheless, udvega is still a result of karmic
account. When the sense of doer-ship is broken, the effect of
emotional agitation (udvega) will not manifest as udvega. It will
express in some other form as a minor entanglement or
suffocation.
One man tells me, ‘Dada, I feel as if my head is going to
explode.’ That verily is emotional agitation (udvega). What can
one do? But you silly man, does the head ever explode? The
skull is not likely to crack even with a hammer but just look at
the difficulties of an udvega. It can be such that it will break
open your blood vessels in the head. Emotional agitation
(udvega) takes place even when one does not want it because
udvega is bound to occur as long as one is a doer of aavega.
After attaining our Gnan, doer-ship ceases and therefore
udvega will not occur.
Questioner: But is udvega not the result of karma
caused in the past life?
Dadashri: Yes, one will have to suffer the results of all
past earnings! Does he not ‘enjoy’ the fruits of that udvega?
Questioner: Is there a relationship between anger and
emotional agitation (udvega)?
Dadashri: Yes, udvega occurs only when there is anger.
Aavega too occurs only in the presence of anger. Therefore, as
long as one is a ‘doer’, there will be krodha, maan, maya and
lobh (anger, pride, deceit and greed) and people continue doing
what they do. As long as everything remains within normal limits,
it is called aavega and when it goes out beyond one’s control
it is called udvega.

60

Aptavani-9

Questioner: If one chants mantras with awareness when
udvega arrives, will it make a difference?
Dadashri: There is no awareness during udvega. There
will be some degree of awareness if it is a minor udvega, then
that udvega could be stopped with chanting mantras but the
awareness will not remain during a major udvega.
Did you understand the three words exactly, in their
appropriate place?
Questioner: I would not understand these three words
even if I read a book on them by some Ph.D. but I have
understood them only because you explained them.
Dadashri: The correct meaning of words can only be
arrived at if those words stand out and become effective in their
right place, but not otherwise. They should fit appropriately in
their place. What happens when you use the word vega in
place of udvega? It would not be a suitable word in other
places. People use words loosely; they do not care whether
they fit or not.
Cunning people are suitable in their own places,
pickpockets are suitable in their place and diamond merchants
are suitable in their place. If a diamond merchant came together
with a pickpocket, would that be suitable? He will be robbed
from all directions; therefore, each has its own suitable place.
Our people reject and scorn the word randapo
(widowhood; losing a spouse). This word randapo is appropriate
in its place. Mandapo (marriage) and randapo (widowhood)
are both exact.

Udvega - so many difficulties
Questioner: Udvega can also occur because of separation
due to difference of opinions, can it not?
Dadashri: Yes, udvega can also occur because of

Aptavani-9

61

separation due to difference of opinions. Udvega starts when
everything becomes excessive; when things go beyond limits.
When a man stabs someone, he does so when he experiences
udvega.
Questioner: Can inner restlessness (ajumpo) be
considered emotional agitation (udvega)?
Dadashri: Restlessness is much better. Restlessness
occurs even when you break a glass. Restlessness is straight and
simple. In udvega you feel as if someone is hitting sharp blows
on your head. But inner restlessness (ajumpo) and outburst that
hurts others (kadhapo) occurs even when you drop and break
a glass. Udvega occurs when something major occurs. Udvega
starts as soon as one becomes emotional; it does not even let
one sleep.
Questioner: But do emotional people not worry more?
Dadashri: Emotional people experience more udvega
not worries and with udvega they feel as if they are dying.
Motion means vega and emotional means udvega.
Questioner: Now, is vega (that which is natural) also not
in motion?
Dadashri: Vega (natural movement) is constantly present.
Vega - motion, should always be there. Those who are living
certainly have vega and they are in motion. All living entities that
experience fear; that run away in fear if you touch them, all
definitely have vega. But the single-sensory (ekindriya) beings
like the trees and plants do not have vega. Their vega is of a
different kind. But every creature has vega. They are always in
vega, they are constantly in motion and when you disturb that
motion, they become emotional and that is called udvega. What
would happen if a train becomes emotional?
Questioner: There will be destruction. It will cause an
accident and people will die.

62

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: That is what happens within the body. Many
of the jivas (the living micro organisms) that live within the body
are killed when you become emotional, and for that you incur a
karmic liability and the second liability is the external problems
(upadhi) that will be caused by the udvega itself.
What is udvega like? It makes one jump in front of a
train, into a river or it makes one take an overdose. Udvega
means the rising of motion leading to extreme emotional
reactions in one’s mind and then one tries to commit suicide. He
will drink poison. ‘You fool, you emptied the whole bottle?’ He
will say, ‘Yes I drank it all.’
A man with udvega will not survive. When a person is in
udvega, it will not let him come to do darshan here. Udvega
is a big thing. Not everyone has seen udvega. Because of this
Gnan, it will all pass in the form of a discharge. So tell the
udvega, ‘However many of you want to come, come on as long
as this body is strong. Do not come when this body is old.’ Let
them come as long as you have the strength. You can fight them
off now.
Move away from that aspect of your
relationship which causes udvega
Questioner: So what is the solution for this udvega?
Dadashri: First, you have to find the instrument (nimit)
behind it. Just thinking about a destructive person will give rise
to udvega. In such cases, move away from the situation or get
rid of anything that causes udvega even if it is made of gold. It
is not your relative. Anything that causes emotional agitation in
you cannot be related to you. The real thing is that which gives
you peace. The slightest cause of udvega is not the path of
liberation. You should remain only in vega – you should remain
only in motion.
If something causes udvega, for example if your son is

Aptavani-9

63

not earning any money, then know that the situation causes you
emotional agitation (udvega). You should then stop entering into
any discussion about money with him. You should stop all
interactions related to money. Just have a casual conversation
with him, like, ‘How are you? How are things?’ Do you
understand?
Questioner: We should let go of anything that causes
udvega, but udvega is relative (temporary). Udvega is
inevitable once all the evidences come together.
Dadashri: Yes, udvega will not refrain from occurring
but there is always a cause behind the occurrence of udvega.
So what should you do about udvega? You have to uproot it.
Intellect is what brings on udvega
Questioner: Does ahambhav (ego), abhimaan (ego
with rich material, extra pride, bragging) cause udvega?
Dadashri: No abhimaan (ego of materialistic possessions)
does not cause udvega; something else causes it. Say you have
to sleep here with everyone else and the light overhead is dim.
No one except you see a small snake come into the room. Will
others who have not seen the snake sleep peacefully?
Questioner: Yes
Dadashri: How about the one who sees it?
Questioner: He will not be able to sleep.
Dadashri: Why is that? He has the knowledge about the
snake coming into the room, others do not and so they are able
to fall asleep. Now when will you be able to sleep? You will be
able to sleep when you gain the knowledge that the snake has
left. Now when will all this end? Therefore, everything becomes
emotional because of all this. The intellect (buddhi) makes one
emotional, not the ego. Ego is a good thing. All these tricks are
of the buddhi (intellect); it is the intellect that causes all the

64

Aptavani-9

problems. It brings on udvega. It brings udvega from vega
(motion).
The ‘one’ who experiences udvega, is not
the Self
Questioner: But even now residual feelings of udvega
continue to arise within us, does it not?
Dadashri: Udvega and vega will both occur but they
are occurring to ‘Chandulal’. They are not occurring to You, the
pure Self. ‘You’ will know that the udvega is occurring in
‘Chandulal’. If Chandulal has done transaction of udvega, then
‘Chandulal’ will experience it, otherwise he will have aavega or
vega. You (the real Self) can know all that.
Questioner: But we live trapped in udvega, do we not?
Dadashri: No it is not like that. Do you believe that the
one who is trapped in udvega is ‘Chandulal’ or You?
Questioner: But ‘Chandulal’ remains trapped does he
not?
Dadashri: He may be trapped but what does that have
to do with You? Whatever has to discharge is going to
discharge, there is no other way. You do not have any say in it.
‘You’ should not feel that You are trapped, because the pure
Soul is the pure Soul. Shuddhatma is Shuddhatma. Nothing can
affect it and that is Shuddhatma.
Questioner: But, I can see that ‘I am pure Soul’ and that
‘Chandulal’ still remains the same.
Dadashri: Whatever karmas that remain are the ones
being discharged. If he makes a donation, you will say,
‘Chandulal is a good man.’ That too is ‘he’ (Chandulal), and if
he does such an udvega, even then it is he, Chandulal. Both the
situations are one; with the same nature (swabhav). It is the
nature of a human being to scorn and repel from the bitter and

Aptavani-9

65

be attracted to the sweet and pleasant. The Lord has called
them both one natured (ek swabhavi).
Shrimad Rajchandra has said :
“Rajkan ke riddhi vaimanik devani
Sarve maanya pudgal ek swabhav jo.”
The smallest particle of dirt or the richness of Vaimanik
Deva (the celestials) - both are considered pudgal nature (as
being matter, non-Self).
There is only one type of non-Self complex (pudgal).
Whether a person is a butcher or a philanthropist, both are nonSelf complex (pudgal). The one who is neither contemptuous
towards the butcher nor pleased with the philanthropist is a
vitarag.
Questioner: Dada you are not going to let me stand at
any location outside the Self.
Dadashri: But if you live in the external station, you will
get a beating and suffer. You have suffered all this time, do you
want to get more beatings and suffer again? That is why I am
showing you a place where you will never have to suffer. Did
you not suffer before attaining Gnan? Did you suffer a little bit?
Everyone has become exhausted from the suffering of all the
beatings.
So it is the buddhi (intellect) that causes all the trouble.
Buddhi is the one that causes udvega; it turns vega into
udvega. ‘We’ experience bliss because every bit of the intellect
is gone from ‘us’. That is why ‘we’ have written in the books,
‘We are abuddha (without intellect).’ This is a good adjective,
is it not? I saw that no one is even ready to accept this adjective.
When ‘we’ tell people, ‘We’ give you the adjective of
‘abuddha,’ they will say, ‘No Sir, I want more buddhi.’ ‘We’
received the adjective of ‘abuddha’, and so ‘we’ never become
emotional. ‘We’ are always in motion; whenever you see ‘us’.

66

Aptavani-9

The root of suspicion (shanka)
Questioner: People say they want more intellect but is it
not true that people with more intellect tend to be more
suspicious?
Dadashri: Yes. Right now, there is an effect of viparit
buddhi (viparit - wrong kind. Buddhi - intellect). It creates a
lot of suspicion (shanka) in a person. Suspicion verily is
tremendous ignorance. One cannot find the answers anywhere
within, so suspicion (shanka) and uncertainty takes hold. A
person will not become suspicious if he finds a solution. He
applies his intellect and when he does not find any answers, he
becomes suspicious. He would not become suspicious if he
found a solution. Suspicion will not arise if vyavasthit is
understood.
Questioner: So what is the root of all suspicion? Why
does suspicion arise?
Dadashri: Suspicion is an interference of the buddhi
(intellect). It is the interference of excessive buddhi. The intellect
that creates suspicion will show one everything negative. It raises
unnecessary and worthless suspicion. In all the worthless
pursuits of the world, the greatest root cause is suspicion, and
this includes doubt (vahem). Initially a suspicion arises. The
intellect causes suspicions. Suspicion is a display of the intellect.
That is why here ‘we’ say only one thing and that is, ‘do not
have any kind of suspicion.’ And there is no reason to be
suspicious about anything in this world. So the root of all
suspicions is the buddhi (intellect).
Questioner: But this intellect will show both the good
and the bad.
Dadashri: No. If a person has just the necessary amount
of intellect then he will not even think (worry) about the welfare
of his five daughters. Suspicion will arise only when thoughts
come, will it not?

Aptavani-9

67

Questioner: So this interference occurs only if there is
excessive intellect?
Dadashri: It is verily the excessive buddhi (intellect) that
causes interference. This is because intellect of this era of the
current time cycle is of the wrong kind (viparit). It is a
misleading intellect (vyabhicharini buddhi) and therefore it
subjects the doer to repeated beatings and suffering.
Questioner: So one with the necessary amount of
intellect will not have unnecessary thoughts?
Dadashri: Yes. There are many people in India with a
necessary amount of buddhi who do not have any other
thoughts. Those laden with extra intellect (akkal) have more
thoughts; they have excess unnecessary intellect, they think
more, they suffer more. Therefore, when a person has to suffer
real misery he will begin to have suspicions.
Suspicion is constant death
Questioner: It is written in the Gita: “Sanshay-atma
vinashyati”, meaning when one begins to have suspicion; one
self-destructs. So is that suspicion referring to the soul or
something else?
Dadashri: Everyone is prone to suspicion. There is not a
single person who does not have suspicion at some time or
other. But some people do not have vishvas (trust) i.e. they do
not trust anything in the world. They will continue to be
suspicious about everything and that kills them; such people are
‘dead’ anyway!
Questioner: Are we talking about suspicion in the
worldly life or in matters related to the Self (nischaya)? Which
suspicion are we talking about?
Dadashri: The whole world has suspicion (uncertainty) in
matters of the Soul (nischaya). That happens as a rule. Lord
Krishna has said, “sanshay-atma vinashyati,” for the worldly

68

Aptavani-9

life. Any man who has suspicions about anything or anyone,
whether it is his wife, father, mother, brother or uncle; that man
is as good as dead. How can a man who has suspicions about
everything, live? The entire world is suspicious about the Soul
and in this regards there is no death. But the one, who has
suspicions in his worldly life, will die; he is dead for sure. Such
a man will not trust anyone; he will continue to have suspicions.
He would like to give goods on credit but keeps having
suspicion about the borrower, such a man is dead for sure.
When a young girl goes to college, her father will have
suspicions about what she must be doing now that she is a
grown woman. He will wonder about who her friends are. He
will have such suspicions. So is he not dead?
Suspicion is of no use whatsoever. If a man goes out with
a knife with the intention of attacking someone, he does not have
any doubts about his actions and that is why he can do that. And
the victim too will die only because he did not suspect anything.
Nevertheless, they die only once whereas a person with
suspicions is dying constantly.
Suspicion and inquisitiveness
Questioner: What is the difference between suspicion
(shanka) and inquisitiveness (jignasa)?
Dadashri: Suspicion and inquisitiveness have nothing in
common. They are not of the same family; there is no
relationship whatsoever between the two.
Questioner: When scientists do research, they proceed
with uncertainty and suspicion.
Dadashri: There is not a single scientist who would
indulge in doubt and suspicion for more than a minute, otherwise
that science would collapse and cease. Suspicion is like suicide.
Those who want to be suspicious can do so.
Questioner: Scientists do not accept anything without

Aptavani-9

69

suspecting. People make discoveries because they question and
have suspicions.
Dadashri: That is not suspicion. It is eagerness to know.
They do not have suspicions.
Questioner: Are you telling us not to be suspicious of
anyone?
Dadashri: Not just people; do not be suspicious about
anything. You are not to have suspicions about this book either.
Suspicion means suicide!
Questioner: So do we have to believe everything that is
written in books?
Dadashri: You do not have to believe everything. You
can be suspicious for only a minute and then you should turn
around. If you go beyond that, then suspicion is such that it will
become a ‘poison’ and kill you.
Questioner: But what if everything that has been written
is false?
Dadashri: It is never wrong or false. But when suspicion
arises, you should stop after a minute.
For devotees…
Questioner: Today in all the religions, the religious gurus
say ‘I verily am God.’ Is that to be believed? Is that not worth
suspecting?
Dadashri: So what if they write such things? There is no
need for you to have suspicion. You will understand that it is
wrong. Doubts or suspicion is a different thing. There is no need
to have the kind of suspicion that you are talking about. There
is no need to have suspicion there. For the time being the guru
is God and the disciple is a devotee, and this is how people’s
lives go on. However when there is a breach of the contract of
such a relationship, there is a possibility that suspicion may arise.
Otherwise, there is no reason for suspicions.

70

Aptavani-9

Questioner: A devotee of every God claims that his God
is the Supreme God.
Dadashri: That is exactly what should be said. If a
devotee does not say that, then I tell him, ‘Consider him
Supreme. He is higher than the one here.’ Then if he asks me,
‘Is the one here all right?’ I would reply, ‘That one is higher than
the one here.’ I had told a few devotees of one saint, ‘Brother,
go there because there it is higher than here.’ People will sit
there only if they consider him the Supreme; otherwise do you
think they will last there? They will keep having doubts and
suspicions wondering, ‘Is it this one or is it that one…is it this
one or is it that one?’
Questioner: So is he not likely to get hurt there? Surely,
any form of investigation has suspicion at its root?
Dadashri: You may inquire, think on it and then move
away. There is no need to bring suspicion into it. When does
suspicion arise? It arises when there is a break in their mutual
agreement resulting in a problem. Suspicion can never occur on
its own.
So where do we find suspicion? When there is a
connection between the two and when there is a deviation from
what one had ‘decided’ in that agreement between the two, it
gives rise to suspicion as to ‘what is all this?’ You should not be
suspicious for more than a minute. After that he should decide,
‘such is my vyavasthit’. Thereafter, there must not be any
suspicion. Suspicion means killing yourself.
Keep a medicine for suspicions
Questioner: What is it called when a person develops a
doubt (vahem) in his mind?
Dadashri: Where does it come from? Does it not have
to be exported from somewhere? Only then can it be imported
into us.

Aptavani-9

71

A man hears a story about someone being possessed by
a ghost. His wife has gone to visit her parents and he is sleeping
alone in his room at night. While he is asleep, around midnight,
a mouse makes a noise in the kitchen. He hears the noise and
remembers the story about the ghost, so with these two
evidences coming together, he thinks something must be there to
make such a loud noise. Therefore, the doubt (vahem) remains
until he discovers the truth. He will remain in this state until he
has knowledge, which is contrary to the knowledge he already
has. Then when his friend comes around the next morning, he
gets the courage and tells his friend about how scared he was
the night before. When his friend tells him to check into the
noise, he goes in the kitchen and finds that a mouse had dropped
a tin can and a few other things. Then all his doubts (vahem) go
away. Therefore, it is because of a wrong understanding that one
is not able to sleep at night. But if he has a medicine to remove
his doubt (vahem), would he not be able to sleep? So the man
will become happy if he understands a little bit.
It all depends on the sub-atomic particles
(parmanus)
Suspicion that arises is a stock within. Suspicion is a
feminine element (streetatva). In every human body there are
three kinds of parmanus (subatomic particles); female (stree),
male (purush) and bisexual (napunsak). The body is made up
of these three types of parmanus. One is born a male when
there is an aggregation of predominantly male parmanus. If
there is a higher proportion of female parmanus, one is born a
woman and neutral when there are more neutral parmanus.
Within any body there are more or less these three types of
parmanus. Vahem (doubt), sandeha (dubiousness), shanka
(suspicion) etc. are all female parmanus. You have to tell them,
‘Get out! I am a Purush (the Self)!’ ‘We’ do not have such
parmanus so ‘we’ never have any suspicion or become
suspicious.

72

Aptavani-9

Does suspicion result in prejudice?
You should never become suspicious even when you have
witnessed something yourself. Nothing haunts a person as much
as suspicion. You should never have suspicions. Uproot
suspicion the moment it arises by saying, ‘Dada has said ‘no’ to
it’. Even if someone says, ‘I have seen this man take money out
of someone’s pocket yesterday with my own eyes. He is back
again today,’ you should not be suspicious. Instead of becoming
suspicious, create a safe side for yourself. Otherwise, it is a form
of prejudice. Today that person may not be that way. Many will
never steal again. Circumstances force some people to steal,
they steal out of necessity and then you may not see them doing
so even if you leave money around.
Questioner: And yet some are seasoned thieves! They
have made a profession of stealing.
Dadashri: Such thieves are different altogether. When
they are around, you have to hang your coat somewhere safe.
Nevertheless, you must not call him a thief. Although you do not
call him a thief to his face, you are calling him so in your mind,
are you not? You incur a liability when you call him a thief in
your mind but if you say it to his face, then you are not liable.
If you call him a thief to his face, he will beat you up and that
liability is a gross physical liability; an external liability. You are
liable for saying it in your mind (liable in two ways; firstly for the
adverse mediation and secondly for binding new karma). So
then what should you do?
Questioner: One should not keep it in his mind, nor
should he take the punishment.
Dadashri: Yes, or it is better to tell him on his face. He
will curse you and go away. But there is a danger for what is
kept in your mind. So what is best? The best thing is to neither
keep it in your mind nor say it to his face. To keep it in your
mind is what the Lord calls prejudice. A person steals due to

Aptavani-9

73

maturation of his karma and today that karma may not be there.
Every living being in the world is dependent upon his karmas. So
are such things not likely to happen?
Question: Yes they are.
Dadashri: Still, our people are experts at harboring
suspicion, are they not? ‘We’ never have suspicions. ‘We’ stop
them before they arise. The one who gets rid of all suspicions
is a Gnani. The whole world is dying because of the ghosts of
suspicions. Someone will say, ‘Yesterday I saw that person
stealing as he passed by this way. Today he has come again.’
This is suspicion rising within.
Questioner: What happens if a suspicion of ‘This man is
interfering’ arises within the mind?
Dadashri: No one is interfering. The one who has such
suspicion is the guilty one and should be thrown in jail. Such a
person will suffer. He is the one who will suffer. Nobody has to
make him suffer; nature will do that.
How can the world remain calm even for a moment? How
many kinds of suspicions are there? And how much suffering is
there in being suspicious? All these sufferings of taapa,
santaap, prataap, uttaapa (various forms of suffering) have
arisen because of suspicion.
Solution for suspicion
You never experience any doubts or suspicions, do you?
Questioner: It is bound to happen, is it not?
Dadashri: What do you do when suspicion arises within
you?
Questioner: I will inspect it very closely!
Dadashri: You will create more doubts and suspicion by
attempting to check out whether it is true or not. If there is one

74

Aptavani-9

thing in this world that is absolutely worth rejecting, it is
suspicion. The root of all miseries is suspicion.
When someone tells ‘us’ that suspicion has arisen within
him, I teach him to remove it instantly from its roots and throw
it out. It is not worth having any suspicions. Suspicion destroys
a person. Whatever may happen, under no circumstances
should you have suspicion; because nothing is going to change
by being suspicious. On the contrary, it gets worse. Suspicion,
doubts and other such diseases then arise.
Questioner: Then how can suspicion be removed?
Dadashri: It can never be removed and therefore it is
best not to let it enter the mind.
Questioner: But how can one get rid of suspicion that
has already entered?
Dadashri: When a person comes to ‘us’ for the vidhi
(special blessings), ‘we’ will remove it from him. But more
important is to not let suspicion arise in the first place.
Questioner: But one needs a closure for his suspicion,
does he not?
Dadashri: Yes, one will achieve something when his
suspicions are removed. If you see a small snake going into your
home, what will happen when you have to go to sleep? Will you
not continue to have suspicions? That snake may have left the
house but you may not have seen it leave, will you still not
suspect that it is still there? What kind of a state will you be in?
How well will you be able to sleep?
Questioner: I will lose my sleep.
Dadashri: Those who are unaware will sleep well and
those who are aware will think, ‘We will not be able to sleep
now that we saw it, but at least let those other poor people
sleep.’ Those who are unaware will snore away. How can the

Aptavani-9

75

one who is aware, sleep? He knows that there is a snake there,
so what can we do about that?
Therefore, what do the scriptures say? ‘You had the
knowledge of the snake entering your home and now you will
be free only when you attain the knowledge of the snake leaving
your home.’ One will continue to be suspicious if he is not aware
of the snake leaving and he will not be able to fall asleep. He
will toss and turn whole nightlong. He will continue to wonder,
‘What if the snake comes here?’ What is the snake going to do?
What is it going to take out of your pocket?
Questioner: What can it do with things in the pocket?
Dadashri: Then what is it going to do?
Questioner: It will bite.
Dadashri: For what? Will it be a lawful bite or an
unlawful one? There is nothing in this world that is happening
that is unlawful, not even for a moment. Everything that happens,
happens within the laws of nature. So do not be mistaken.
Whatever happens, or has happened, was within the dictates
of nature’s law. What does our Gnan say? It says, ‘Forget
about the snake entering the house; it is vyavasthit. Why don’t
you go to sleep?’ Our Gnan will help him sleep without any
suspicions.
‘We’ have slept in many such situations because most of
‘our’ business was in the jungles. A snake would be sleeping
where I could see it. When ‘we’ woke up in the morning, ‘we’
would see the snake sleeping. The snake would sleep and so
would ‘we’. Where else could that poor snake go in the jungle?
Wherever it found a place to sleep, that place would be his. We
can at least go to our in-laws for a couple of days but the snake
has no in-laws to go to!
That is why ‘we’ have said ‘vyavasthit’. There is
‘exactness’. Not a grain worth of change can be made.

76

Aptavani-9

Passing through every phase
‘We’ have analyzed all these things and this analysis is not
of just one life. Can there be so many analyses in just one life?
How many analyses can occur in eighty years? This analysis,
which is coming forth today, is of many life times.
Questioner: In what way does the analysis of so many
past lives, come together now, and present itself?
Dadashri: It is because the veils of ignorance have been
destroyed. Knowledge (Gnan) is ready and present within but
the veils over it have to be destroyed. The stock of Gnan is
already there but it can only manifest if the veils of ignorance
over it are destroyed.
I have discovered the knowledge (Gnan) of all phases. I
have gone through all the phases and have brought about an
‘end’ to all those phases. Thereafter this Gnan manifested.
How many phases does the moon have? There are fifteen
phases. Those fifteen phases have influenced the world since
time immemorial. When people say it is the second day of the
moon, they are referring to the same old moon. Then they will
say it is the moon of the third day, or half moon, or full moon.
If the moon itself were to say, ‘I am the third lunar moon. I am
the third lunar moon’, people would comment, ‘Why do you say
you are the third lunar moon? Are you not going to change
tomorrow?’ The moon is one and the same all along. Its phases
will change as the days go by. But people question even this, ‘Is
it the second or the third lunar moon today? No it can’t be the
third, it must be the second!’ And someone else will say, ‘It is
the third.’ People have doubts even over such things. Does one
even have to go looking for suspicions and doubts?
This is why people are miserable. Suspicion is the very
cause of their misery. That is why I am asking you to understand
what I am saying. You need to understand all the phases. Every

Aptavani-9

77

phase of the world has come to me. There is not a single phase
of the world, which I have not traversed. I am aware of the
phases of every lifetime and this talk is the experience of all
those phases.
The ‘one’ who is beyond worldly interactions,
‘settles’ it
The ‘one’ who is beyond worldly interactions (vyavahar)
can ‘settle’ it for you. Otherwise, nothing can be settled in
worldly interactions. The one who is involved in the worldly life
can never have the awareness of the worldly life. He will insist
on the worldly life and is absorbed in it, consequently he will not
‘know’ the worldly interaction. The Gnani Purush is beyond the
worldly life and therefore His speech comes forth such that
everything becomes ‘exact’ for us. Suspicion is something that
will never go away, even if one tries to get rid of it. On the
contrary, it increases. It leaves through the speech of the Gnani.
Suspicion leads to destruction
Outside of this satsang, people are of the opinion,
‘Suspicions occur when it is a fact. We are not humans if
suspicions do not arise. Do animals have suspicions? We are
humans and that is why we have suspicions about our
daughters.’ That is what they teach us. Why do ‘we’ get rid of
your suspicions? It is because they do not help at all, not even
a little bit, and it causes harm to no end. That is why. ‘We’
would not be able to say this if suspicion is helpful. Even if it
helps ten percent and harms ninety percent, ‘we’ would not be
able to speak this way. However, it does not help even in the
slightest and it does tremendous damage.
The one who is suspicion-laden is a living dead
Suspicion is the cause of destruction. That is what kills
people. Once it starts, there is no end to it and that is why it
destroys people.

78

Aptavani-9

On the most part, if women become suspicious, they will
forget about it but if they remember; then it will destroy them.
On the other hand, men will create suspicion even if there is no
cause for it. When a woman becomes suspicious, she is called
a witch. Meaning she is possessed by both a ghost and a witch.
This will kill a human being. ‘We’ ask those who meet ‘us’,
whom they become suspicious about, whether it is people in
their home, the neighbors, brother, wife, or anyone else. ‘We’
encourage them to tell ‘us’ so that ‘we’ can repair it for them.
Suspicion is a very contagious disease; it has become very
widespread. A person with suspicion becomes very unhappy. It
is very difficult! Once a person is overcome with suspicion, he
will be suspicious about everyone. In this world, a dead
person and a suspicion-laden (shankashil) person are both
the same. A man that becomes suspicion-laden is suspicious
everywhere. Such a person is same as a dead person; he lives
a life of the dead.
Why have suspicions where everything
happens automatically?
You must not have suspicion on anything. Suspicion is the
greatest of miseries. There is no other misery like it.
At night when you eat your supper and go to sleep, do
you check to see if all the digestive enzymes are released
properly or not? Do you check to see how much digestive
enzyme is released or how much bile is released? Did you ever
look into this?
Questioner: All that occurs automatically. What is the
need for us to verify all that?
Dadashri: So then, do things not occur automatically on
the outside? It works wonderfully internally and like wise,
nothing needs to be done on the outside either. How well the
blood, urine and excreta are separated internally! Even milk for
a newborn baby is made in a new mother. So much preparation

Aptavani-9

79

takes place! Yet, you sleep soundly. How much preparation is
going on within while you sleep peacefully! Who does all that
internally? Do you not have any suspicions about this?
Questioner: No.
Dadashri: Then you should not have any suspicions
about the outside world either. Whatever is taking place within
the inner complex of mind-intellect-chit and ego (antahkaran),
the same is taking place on the outside, so why get upset over
it? Why do you invite unnecessary external problems?
Suspicion is harmful at all times
One becomes suspicious of his daughter when she goes to
college. He will even suspect his wife. What a betrayal! In this
era of Kaliyug, there is betrayal even amongst people in the
same home. Kaliyug means an era of betrayal. There is nothing
but deceit and betrayal, deceit and betrayal, deceit and betrayal.
For what happiness does a person do this? And that too, one
does it in complete unawareness. Intelligent people should not
be doing this. People with clean intellect should not have deceit
and betrayal; only the foolish do. Kaliyug means collection of
foolish people.
Questioner: Does attachment and abhorrence not play a
role in mistrust and betrayal?
Dadashri: Only in the presence of attachment and
abhorrence (raag-dwesh) does all this take place. Otherwise, if
a person does not have any raag-dwesh, he will not have these
problems. It makes no difference if a person without raagdwesh does good or bad, because although he plays with dirt,
there is no oil on his body (nothing will stick to him i.e. he will
not create any karma because he does not have raag or
dwesh), while others have oil on their body!
Questioner: But does the buddhi (intellect) not take part
in deceit (kapat) and betrayal?

80

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: No, good intellect will get rid of deceit and
betrayal; it will maintain a safe-side. On the one hand, suspicion
kills a person, then deceit and betrayal is inevitable, and
everyone is caught up indulging in their worldly ‘happiness’.
Questioner: But to remain in such happiness, does one
not use deceit and betrayal with the help of the intellect?
Dadashri: There is no presence of good buddhi
(intellect) when one is looking for his own happiness. Good
buddhi looks for everyone’s collective happiness in the home.
But here, the son looks for his own happiness, the wife looks for
her own happiness, the daughter looks for her own happiness,
the father looks for his own happiness and so everyone looks
for his or her own happiness. If these facts were exposed, then
no family members would live with each other. But they all eat,
drink and live together, so it is best left covered.
There is absolutely no need to be suspicious in any
situation. Suspicion verily destroys a person. Everyone is dying
because of his or her suspicions. The mightiest ‘ghost’ in this
world is that of suspicion. The best of people have been
destroyed by it; therefore do not let suspicion arise in the first
place. Destroy it the moment it arises. Do not let it grow.
Otherwise it will not let you live peacefully. Suspicion has killed
and destroyed even the greatest of men like the powerful
Chakravarti emperors.
The dangers are grave
Even if people tell you, ‘this man is worthless’, you should
call him worthy because at times he may not be worthless and
if you call him worthless, you will incur a tremendous liability. If
a woman is chaste and virtuous, it is a terrible sin to call her a
prostitute. You incur such a liability that you will have to pay for
it for many lives to come. Therefore, do not say anything that
will violate someone’s character because what if it is not true?
What is your own worth if you say things about someone

Aptavani-9

81

because others say so? ‘We’ have never said anything about
anybody and ‘we’ will never do so. ‘We’ do not interfere. Who
would want to take on the liability? You should never be
suspicious about anyone’s character. It carries a great danger.
‘We’ never become suspicious. Why should ‘we’ take on the
liability?
How much strain should you put on your
eyes in the dark?
Questioner: What adjustment should one take if he has
developed a habit of viewing everything with suspicion
(shankashil)?
Dadashri: When you see inappropriate conduct in
someone, was it not there before? Do you think it has come
about all of a sudden? So you should understand that this is
what the world is all about. You should never judge anyone’s
character in these times of Kaliyug. It is like this everywhere in
the current time cycle. It may not be clearly visible but the mind
will become ruined for sure. In all this, a woman’s character is
a museum filled with illusion (moha) and deceit (kapat), and
that is why they are born as women. The best way amidst all this
is for one to become free from all sexuality.
Questioner: We realize that is the way it is in sexual
conduct, nevertheless, when the mind becomes suspicious, one
becomes engrossed (tanmayakar) in it. What adjustment
should one take there?
Dadashri: After becoming the Self, do not get involved
in anything. All that (suspicions etc.,) belongs to the ‘foreign
department’; to the non-Self. You should remain in the ‘home
department’ (the Self). Stay in your real Self! You will not find
Gnan such as this again so get your work done. One man
constantly used to be suspicious about his wife. ‘We’ asked him
why he was suspicious about his wife. Was he suspicious
because he saw something? And if that was the case, was the

82

Aptavani-9

same thing not going on before he witnessed it? People call a
person who gets caught stealing, a thief, but those who do not
get caught are thieves from within, are they not? Here people
only label the ones who get caught as thieves. Why are you
calling them thieves? In fact they are trivial thieves because they
get caught. Do you think those who steal on a regular basis are
likely to get caught?
Questioner: But it is when one is caught stealing, that he
is called a thief.
Dadashri: No, the ones who steal occasionally are the
ones who get caught. And because they are caught, people call
them thieves. The real thief is the one who does not get caught,
but this is how the world is.
So this man understood ‘our’ whole Vignan. Then he tells
me, ‘From now I will not be alarmed even when someone puts
his arm around my wife.’ Yes that is how it should be if you want
to go to moksha! Otherwise, you will keep quarreling with your
wife. Your wife can never be your wife in this current time cycle
of dushamkaal (aka as Kaliyug, this current time cycle is
characterized as a time of lack of unity in people’s thoughts,
speech and action; an era of moral and spiritual decline) and it
is futile to even expect that. This is the dushamkaal, she is yours
as long as she stays with you and cares for you otherwise she
is someone else’s if she cares for another.
That is why ‘we’ have told all the mahatmas, not to
harbor suspicions. ‘We’ also ask them why would they take
things for granted and believe everything true just because they
have not witnessed anything in this current time cycle. Everything
is hollow and without substance to begin with. If ‘we’ were to
describe to you what ‘we’ have seen, no man would be living.
Therefore, in this time cycle, there is nothing better than to be
alone and be pleasantly absorbed in living alone. Furthermore,
if one has this Gnan, then there is nothing better.

Aptavani-9

83

Therefore, it is worth getting your work done and that is
why ‘we’ repeatedly keep telling you, ‘get your work done, get
your work done, get your work done!’ The intent behind it is
that this Vignan, this Gnan has never manifested in any of the
time cycles, therefore you should get your work done.
So do you understand? If you had not seen anything,
nothing would have happened. All this is the poison of seeing.
Questioner: Yes, it happens only because I saw it.
Dadashri: So this whole world moves about in darkness
and there is nothing but hollowness in it; there is no integrity or
substance to this world. ‘We’ have seen all this in Gnan but you
have not and that is why you get alarmed when you see
something. Why do you get alarmed? Such things go on all the
time, but you simply don’t see it. What is there to be alarmed
about when you are the Self? All it is, is simply a discharge of
karma of all that was charged in the past life. The entire world
is clearly in the form of discharge. The world is not outside of
discharge. And that is why ‘we’ tell you, the world is in the form
of a discharge and that is why no one is at fault.
Questioner: So does the principle of karma work here
too?
Dadashri: Yes, purely the principle of karma is working
here and nothing else. No individual is at fault. It is the poor
man’s karma that makes him go round and round. But if one has
suspicion in all this, then he is doomed for no reason.
For those going to moksha
Know that you are on your way to moksha when
dehadhyas goes away. Dehadhyas means to believe ‘I am the
body’. You are on the path of the vitarag if you do not
experience any attachment or abhorrence when someone
curses you, beats you or takes your wife away from you
before your very eyes. Men allow it to happen because of their

84

Aptavani-9

physical weakness. If the other man is strong, he will let him
take his wife away.
So nothing belongs to you; everything is of the non-Self.
If you want to live the worldly life, then become strong in it and
if you want to go to moksha, then become worthy of it. When
even your own body is not your own, how can the wife be
yours? How can the daughter be yours? So you should think
about all this in advance; think about what you should do if
someone were to take your wife away from you.
Therefore, nothing that is destined to occur can be
changed; such is vyavasthit. Therefore do not have any fear.
That is why it has been said that it is vyavasthit. As long as one
is spared of witnessing a scene of infidelity, one carries on
saying, ‘my wife…my wife’. And once he sees it, the inner
turmoil begins. Look here you! It was like this all along. Do not
look for anything new here.
Questioner: But Dada you are being very lenient here.
Dadashri: What ‘we’ are saying is that there is no sense
in having unnecessary expectations in this era of the current time
cycle (dushamkaal). Even the government has created divorce
laws because it is aware that this will happen. That is why they
created the law first. That is why always a medicinal plant will
grow first and then will come the disease. Similarly, a law is
created first and then the incidents take place.
‘Safe-side’ related marital conduct
Therefore, any man who wants peace of mind with
regards to his wife should marry an unattractive woman so that
no other man will be interested in her. She herself will say, ‘No
one else will have me, only my husband keeps me.’ She will
remain very sincere to him. If she is good looking, other men will
enjoy her by looking at her lustfully. They will have bad
intentions towards her. When a man marries a good-looking girl,

Aptavani-9

85

‘we’ think about what is going to become of that poor man.
There is a safe side only if she is not good-looking.
A man will forget God when his wife is beautiful and a
woman too, will forget God when her husband is good looking.
That is why it is good if everything is average. Our elders used
to say, ‘Keep your farm barren and have an ugly wife.’ Why did
they say that? If your wife is beautiful, some man will have bad
intentions towards her and that is why it is better to have an ugly
wife. They were saying this from a different perspective, not
from a religious perspective. ‘We’ are telling you from the
religious perspective. You do not have to worry about anything
if your wife is ugly. If she goes out, no one will have bad
intentions towards her. Our elders were very smart, but that is
not what ‘we’ are telling you; it is quite different. If she is ugly,
then it will not bother you; you will not be tormented and
preoccupied by mistrust.
What a betrayal this is
What kind of people do you find today? Wherever they
see a ‘hotel’ (woman, sexual outlet), they will ‘dine’ (indulge in
lustful fancy or more). Suspicion is the cause of all misery. Both
men and women ‘dine’ wherever they see a ‘hotel’. A man does
not think about what his wife is doing. He thinks she is a good
woman, but he does not realize that she is cheating on him. Men
cheat on their wives and the wives cheat on their husbands.
Women however will win because men do not have as much
kapat (deceit). That is why women easily deceive men.
This worldly life was worth enjoying when there was
sincerity and morality in it. Nowadays there is tremendous
betrayal. If ‘we’ were to tell men about their wives, they would
not even go to them. ‘We’ know everything about everybody
but ‘we’ would not do anything about it. Men are not angels
either, but a woman is a factory of sheer deceit. A warehouse
of deceit is not to be found anywhere except in a woman.

86

Aptavani-9

How can there be moha (attachment due to
illusion) towards such betrayal?
The toilets that we have, are they used by many or just
one person?
Questioner: Everyone uses them.
Dadashri: So a place everyone goes to is called a toilet.
A place where many people go is called a toilet. A relationship
of fidelity to one man and one woman is a conduct of virtue. Till
then a woman’s conduct is considered virtuous otherwise it is
considered a toilet. How many people use the toilet in your
home?
Questioner: Everyone.
Dadashri: It is not used by just one person is it? So
whether two people use it or everyone else does, then it is a
toilet.
People will ‘dine’ when they come across a ‘hotel’.
Hey! They may even wine and dine! So get rid of any
suspicion. With suspicion, you will lose the moksha that is in
the palm of your hands. Therefore, you have to understand just
this much that you are married and that she is your tenant! That
is all you have to keep in your mind. Then whomever she goes
out with, you should not harbor any suspicion. Your concern
is only with your needs, is it not? When you need to use the
toilet; go use it. That which cannot be refrained from visiting,
is called a toilet. That is why the Gnanis have said that the
worldly life is a betrayal.
Questioner: Why does it not appear as a betrayal?
Dadashri: Because of moha (illusionary attachment).
And there has never been anyone to tell you so either. The train
will stop only when someone waves a red flag, otherwise it will
continue and become derailed.

Aptavani-9

87

Solution for situations of extreme suspicion
This world exists because of suspicions. The very tree that
needs to dry out is the tree people ‘water’ with suspicions and
therefore it thrives even more. Therefore, it is not worth being
suspicious in this world.
Do you now get suspicious about anything in this world?
How would you feel if from a distance you see your wife sitting
on a bench with some other man?
Questioner: Now nothing will happen. Initially I would
be affected but then it would be fine. Then I would understand
that it is vyavasthit and that it has to do with past karmic ties
(roonanubandha).
Dadashri: How shrewd you are! What a tremendous
calculation to clear out your karmic account. And you will not
become suspicious will you?
Questioner: No Dada.
Dadashri: And these people start getting suspicious even
when the wife comes home late. Suspicion is not worth getting
into. Nothing is going to happen outside of your karmic account.
If your wife comes home late, explain things to her and reason
with her but do not become suspicious. Suspicion actually feeds
the problem. Yes, you have to caution her, but do not be
suspicious. Those who become suspicious miss moksha.
So if you want liberation, if you want to go to moksha, do
not become suspicious. Just because you see your wife with
another man’s arm around her, does that mean you have to drink
poison?
Questioner: No, why should I do that?
Dadashri: Then what should you do?
Questioner: Act up a little in a dramatic manner. Later,
make her understand. If she still continues to do it, then it is
vyavasthit.

88

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: Yes, that is right. Now you will not have any
suspicions about your wife or anyone else in your home, will
you? These are all ‘files’ and there is nothing to become
suspicious about; is anything worth being suspicious about?
Whatever is the karmic account, whatever the karmic connection,
the ‘files’ will wander accordingly and your goal is to go to
moksha.
That is a dangerous disease
When doubt (vahem) enters in these matters, it will give
you a lot of happiness, will it not?
Questioner: It gnaws away on the inside, like big ants!
Dadashri: Yes, all the waking hours it will eat you alive.
It is like the disease of tuberculosis! In fact TB is better; it
remains active only for a certain time. So suspicion is like the
infection of TB The one in whom suspicion arises, is in the same
condition as the one who comes in contact with TB and
becomes infected with it. Therefore suspicion does not help in
any way. It only causes harm. It should be uprooted the moment
it starts; otherwise it will grow into a tree!
Effects of suspicions
What does suspicion mean? It is like putting a pound of
salt in the milk pudding that is prepared for a large gathering.
What happens if we do that? The milk will turn rancid. People
do not realize the liability of doing this. ‘We’ stay far away from
suspicion. ‘We’ do have thoughts, ‘we’ have a mind so thoughts
are inevitable, but ‘we’ do not have any suspicions. If ever ‘we’
were to look at someone with a suspicious eye, his mind will
become estranged from ‘us’ the next day; the next day he will
begin to feel different about ‘us’.
Therefore, do not have suspicions about anyone or
anything. You have to be alert (jagrut) but not suspicious
towards the other people. Suspicions will destroy you. Whatever

Aptavani-9

89

is going to happen to the other person, will happen but suspicion
will destroy you in the process. Suspicion will not leave a person
until it destroys him. Do you think suspicion is healthy? With
suspicion, a person lives like a corpse.
Therefore, it is best not to be suspicious about anything;
it should be removed from its roots. Suspicion should also be
removed from worldly interactions. Avoid any interaction that
leads to the possibility of suspicion. Suspicion does not help; it
destroys a person. Certain words only cause harm. This word
risavu (being upset and non-communicative) is one such word.
If there is benefit and a loss, it is acceptable but there is only
harm in these words. It is better to get rid of them.
Intellect ruins the worldly life
Questioner: Why does a man with lot of buddhi
(intellect) have more suspicion?
Dadashri: He can see all the phases through his intellect.
He can see, ‘it must be this way, this is how he must have put
his arm around her etc.’ If some man were to put his arm around
his wife, that would give rise to suspicions of all kind and all the
phases (paryaya) of, ‘what must be going on?’ And that chain
of phases initiated by the intellect will continue, whereas an
abuddha person i.e. a person without excess buddhi (intellect)
will not be concerned with it much. Actually, such a person is
not truly abuddha i.e. he is not truly without intellect. The Gnani
has gone beyond the intellect; he has enough intellect to run his
daily life. He does not have any other unnecessary intellect
with its other complications. Something will happen within and
then it will stop. He will use whatever intellect is necessary and
then stop.
Questioner: So are you talking about those who lack
worldly intelligence; those whose intellect has not developed
yet?

90

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: No there are very few such people; people
like the laborers and such people.
Questioner: But do people not attain intellect first and
then attain the state of abuddha (the state of being without
excess intellect)?
Dadashri: That is a different thing altogether. That is a
parmatma state – the state of the supreme Soul. After attaining
intellect, when one becomes abuddha, that is the state of
parmatma (the state of the absolute Self).
But this worldly life becomes very difficult for a person
with intellect. If a man with excess intellect has five daughters,
when the daughters grow up and start going out, he will start to
recall all the phases. He can understand everything with his
intellect. He can visualize everything and then he becomes very
troubled and entangled. Nevertheless, he has no choice but send
his daughters off to college and yet he has to see all the phases
his intellect shows him. Whether something happens or not God
only knows but he dies of suspicions.
He has no knowledge of events that are actually taking
places and so he has no suspicions about them but he has
endless suspicions where there is nothing going on. He is
scorched by endless suspicions and he becomes fearful. So, the
moment suspicion arises in a person, he is doomed.
Suspicion, continued suspicion and
destructive suspicion
Questioner: Please explain shanka (suspicion), aashanka
(repeated suspicion), and kushanka (destructive suspicion)?
Dadashri: A father with intellect has a grown up
daughter. He does not have a lot of attachment towards her, so
he will automatically understand that he has to keep a suspicious
eye (shanka) on his daughter. He will have to keep a careful eye
on her. A man with awareness will always be alert. One can

Aptavani-9

91

keep a suspicious eye for one day but does it have to be
everyday? To keep a suspicious eye the next day is aashanka.
Should there not be an end to it? Whatever vision of suspicion
was employed, should it not end? All that is aashanka. Now
what is kushanka? If she is going out with a boy, the father will
have all kinds of kushanka (negative phases in suspicion) in his
mind. Now it may or may not be true. These kinds of suspicions
make human beings miserable.
In this world it is not worth harboring suspicion (shanka);
it is worth being aware (jagruti). Suspicion is taking on
unnecessary misery upon one’s self. It eats away a person on
the inside, day and night. It is necessary to be aware. What is
the point of fretting unnecessarily when it is not under your
control? Or if you have any understanding in this regard, then
stop the girls from going to college. To this statement, the father
will claim, ‘Who would marry her if she is not educated?’ He is
not happy this way and he is not happy the other way. Look
here you! Take one position and come to a closure. Alternatively,
yet another solution is to go around with the daughter day and
night! Go with her to college and sit with her in the class. If the
professor asks, ‘Why do you accompany your daughter?’ then
tell him, ‘Sir, I keep having suspicions about her and so if I stay
with her, I will no longer have suspicions.’ People will call him
a stupid fool. The daughter herself will say he is a little crazy.
Therefore, I am telling you not to be suspicious of your
daughters. There are people who are not suspicions about their
daughter. Even if they have seven daughters, there is nothing of
the sort. They are carefree.
They have other kinds of suspicions; ‘My partner is
definitely taking a few rupees home everyday from the business.’
He has this kind of suspicion, it’s because he loves money.
Suspicion for one day is called shanka (suspicion) and suspicion
that is done over and over again, is called aashanka.

92

Aptavani-9

The unawareness of moha (illusionary
attachment)
A person may not have suspicions towards his daughters
because he has moha (attachment due to illusion; moha or
raag) for them. One can never see a mistake or a wrongdoing
where there is illusion (moha). The whole world takes a beating
due to this moha. Every parent will say, ‘My daughters are
good girls.’ So that must mean that the current cycle is that of
Satyug (an era of virtue and morality)! Any parent you ask will
say the same thing, so this must be Satyug, don’t you think? And
then they will say, ‘Other people’s daughters are unchaste.’
They even say this.
Questioner: And nowadays if one says anything about
his daughter, he will come down on you.
Dadashri: You can never say that. He will come down
hard on you and curse you. You can never say anything to
anyone. It is good that parents have attachment (raag) towards
their children. They do not see any faults in their children
because of their attachment and yet they will see faults in other
people’s children. It is good that they do not see faults in their
daughters; it keeps them at peace for the time being, and they
will worry about other things when the time comes.
Unconstructive criticism
One man told me, ‘My daughters are very sensible and
wise.’ I told him, ‘That is very nice.’ Then he started to criticize
other girls so I told him, ‘Why are you criticizing other girls?
Other people will criticize you if you criticize them.’ He told me
there was nothing in him that warranted criticism. So I told him,
‘I will show you something, but you must remain silent.’ Then I
showed him his daughter’s books and everything in it. He was
shocked and so I told him, ‘Just keep quiet. Do not criticize
anyone. I knew all this about you and yet why did I not say a
word to you? Why do I remain quiet even when you are being

Aptavani-9

93

pompous about all this?’ I understood that he got satisfaction
by being self-righteous; at least he felt at peace but when he
started to criticize others, I had to tell him, ‘Do not criticize.’
It is wrong to criticize other people’s daughters when you have
daughters of your own. People who do not have daughters of
their own would not criticize this way but the ones with
daughters criticize a lot. Being a father yourself, are you not
ashamed of criticizing in this way? If you entertain such
suspicion, where will it end?
Girls today are so naive that they think their fathers will
never read their personal diaries. They keep their personal
letters in their schoolbooks. The fathers are naïve too; they trust
their daughters. But I know everything and realize that the girl is
mature and grown up. I would advice him to get his daughter
married, what else can I say?
Beware! Parents of daughters
One of my close relatives had four daughters. He was
very aware in worldly matters. He tells me, ‘These girls are
grown up and are going to college but I cannot trust them.’ I
told him, ‘Then go to the college with them and follow them till
they come home. You can do that for one day but what will you
do the following day? Send your wife?’ He had no understanding
of where he should place his trust and where not. You simply
have to tell your daughter, ‘Dear daughter. Ours is a noble family
and well respected in the community. Please take this into
consideration as you interact with the world.’ You have to
caution her this way and then whatever happens is correct. Do
not have suspicions. How many parents will be suspicious?
Those who have worldly awareness due to excessive intellect
will keep having suspicions. The dumb ones will not.
Any suspicion that arises should be removed the moment
it arises. One becomes suspicious even when his daughter goes
out to play. Would he be happy once suspicion arises?

94

Aptavani-9

Questioner: No, then there is no point in having any
suspicion about her.
Dadashri: Yes, that is it. Whatever the reason, one
should not let suspicion arise. You should be vigilant and aware
but do not become suspicious. The moment you allow suspicion
to occur, realize that ‘death’ has come.
Questioner: But suspicion arises on its own does it not?
Dadashri: Yes, but it is a tremendously dangerous
ignorance. It causes a lot of pain. When your daughter goes out
and someone tells you that she has gone to meet her boyfriend,
it will cause you to have suspicion on your daughter. How will
you feel?
Questioner: That is it, after that the restlessness continues
within.
Dadashri: Will your restlessness solve the problem on
the outside? Is it going to stop her from going out with her
boyfriend? Nothing is going to change and that suspicion will kill
you. Therefore, the moment suspicion arises, instantly remember
that Dada has said ‘no’ to it and that you are to stop it.
Nevertheless, you should take the necessary precautions.
Do others not have daughters too? And do their
daughters not go to college also? It is not like the old days when
girls were kept at home, is it? So do you not have to act
according to the current times? If other girls talk to their boy
friends, then can your daughters not do the same with their boy
friends?
It is no fun to see these parents when they become
suspicious about their daughters because they either have seen
or heard something about their daughters. When they come to
me asking for help, I tell them to get rid of their suspicions. You
are suspicious because you saw something, what if you had not
seen it? Suspicion arose only from what you saw, so why don’t

Aptavani-9

95

you correct it thus: just behave as if that you never saw anything
in the first place? It is all already there ‘underground’, but the
father worries, ‘What if this were to happen?’ He becomes
possessed with ghosts of suspicion, which will not leave him
alone, the whole nightlong. These ghosts will not let him go for
months on end. Therefore, it is wrong to have suspicions.
Suspicion? No, take care of her
A father of four girls had come to me for advice. He said,
‘I have four daughters going to college and it is natural to be
concerned. What should I do about it? What should I do about
these four girls? What if they get on the wrong path?’ I told him,
‘But they will not improve by you being suspicious.’ Do not be
suspicious. When they come home, sit down with them and talk
to them properly, be friends with them. Talk to them about their
likes and dislikes. Do not be preoccupied with your job and
making money. Take care of your daughters needs first. They
love it when you eat, drink and talk with them. The love you
have for them is superficial and that is why they seek love
elsewhere.
Then I asked him if he would throw his daughter out of
the house if she fell in love with someone and stayed out late at
night? He tells me, ‘Yes, I will tell her to get out. I would not
let her come into the house.’ I told him, ‘Do not ever do that.
Where would she go in the middle of the night? Where would
she take shelter? You should tell her, ‘Come. Sit. Go to sleep’
There is a rule that you have already suffered damage but now
just make sure that you do not suffer double the damage. The
girl had already done harm by her actions but it would be a
disaster if you were to throw her out of the house. When you
have incurred a loss of a hundred thousand dollars, would you
do something to reduce the loss or increase it? Should there not
be a solution for the loss you are incurring? So do not incur any
more loss. Let her go to sleep and the next day explain to her
that she should come home on time and that it makes you very

96

Aptavani-9

anxious when she comes home late; it makes you so anxious that
you may get a heart attack. You have to reason with her one
way or another.’ He then realized the consequences of what
would happen to her if he were to kick her out. Other people
would take advantage of her and that would be the end. If you
throw her out at one o’clock in the morning, how helpless would
that poor girl become? Should you not think about what people
of this time cycle are like?
So do not be suspicious even if your daughter ever comes
home late. How much benefit is there in getting rid of your
suspicions? What is the point of worrying unnecessarily?
Nothing is going to change in one lifetime. Do not cause your
sons and daughters any unnecessary misery. You have to tell
them, ‘Daughter, you should not come late when you go out.
Our family is very honorable so it does not suit us. So do not
come home late.’ Talk to them and reason with them this way.
But you cannot afford to worry about who she may be going out
with and what she must be doing. And when she comes home
at midnight you still have to tell her, ‘Daughter, this should not
happen again.’ You do not know where she will go if you throw
her out. Do you understand that? Where is the gain in it if you
do? Is it not better to have the least amount of harm? That is
why I have told everyone to let their daughters come into the
house even if they come home late; do not throw them out.
Strong headed people will throw them out, will they not? How
strange is the current era! How anxiety filled this era is? This is
the Kaliyug, so sit down with them and explain things to them.
Free from kashayas on the path of moksha
So what ‘we’ tell you to do is settle your files with
equanimity. These are all files. They are not your daughter or
wife. These daughters and wives are all ‘files’. Settle matters
with all your files with equanimity. When you become paralyzed,
no one will stand by you. On the contrary, they will get irritated
if it goes on for long time. Even the person with paralysis will

Aptavani-9

97

understand that everyone is irritated, but what can he do? The
path that Dada has shown you is straight; it is ekavtari i.e. you
can achieve liberation within one more lifetime. So remain in
saiyam (without kashayas: anger-pride-deceit and greed) and
settle your files with equanimity. Whether she is your daughter,
your wife or anyone else, deal with her, with equanimity. No one
is anyone’s daughter or wife, in this world. Everything is
dependant upon the fruition of one’s own karma. However, we
cannot make this statement to those who do not have Gnan. If
you tell them this, they will fight with you.
Now when does your moksha become ruined? When you
become asaiyami (with kashayas: anger-pride-deceit-greed).
Our Gnan is not such that it will cause asaiyam. Gnan is
constant saiyam. Externally induced troubles (upadhi) arise the
moment suspicion arises.
Therefore, to have suspicion or to become laden with
suspicion (shankashil) is a grave liability. I have seen a father of
nine girls be free of suspicions, even in the worst of Kaliyug.
And all the girls got married. How long would he have lived, had
he lived in suspicion? So never become suspicious because you
will be the greatest loser.
Questioner: What kind of a loss does one incur with
suspicion? Please clarify this.
Dadashri: It is nothing but misery. Direct living misery!
Is that a minor loss? If one goes deeper and becomes even
more suspicious, it will cause him pain that is comparable to
death.
Questioner: It will hurt like being struck with a spear.
Dadashri: A spear is better. There is greater pain and
misery in suspicion. A spear just jabs but suspicion will kill a
person. Do not be suspicious otherwise it will lead to more
anguish and turmoil.

98

Aptavani-9

Solution for suspicions
No man can be free from suspicion. When my mother
was alive, there were moments when I would get off the train at
Baroda station, I would have thoughts like, ‘What if mother died
suddenly today? How am I even going to enter the home?’ I
used to have such suspicions. All kinds of suspicions can arise
in a man. But I studied all this from all the angles and concluded
that it all mounted to nothing. This world is not such that one
should have any suspicions.
Questioner: Even I become suspicious when I get a
phone call from India, ‘What if something happened to mother?’
Dadashri: But suspicion does not help at all. It causes
misery. One never knows when an elderly person may die. Are
you able to save them? If suspicion is going to arise, keep doing
a vidhi (special inner spiritual adjustment) to the pure Soul of
that person, as follows: ‘Dear pure Soul within the (name of the
person concerned), which is separate from his dravya (discharge)
karma, bhaav (charge) karma and nokarma (neutral), please
grant peace to him.’ Do this vidhi before suspicion arises. If
suspicion arises then change it around with this vidhi.
Vyavasthit eliminates suspicion
The world is miserable from suspicions. Suspicions can
take a human being to a lower life form. Nothing is to be gained
from suspicions. According to the law of vyavasthit, no one can
destroy anything so why are you meddling needlessly by
becoming suspicious.
Vyavasthit means whatever ‘is’, is and whatever ‘is not’,
is not. Whatever ‘is’, is not going to become ‘is not’ and what
‘is not’, is not going to become ‘is’. Your meddling is not going
to change anything. Therefore, become suspicious-less. After
attaining this Gnan, you have become suspicious-free in matters
of the Soul; the awareness that you have attained is verily the
Soul and everything else is a discharge of past karmas.

Aptavani-9

99

If you were to use vyavasthit in this way, it will stop many
suspicions from arising. You cannot say ‘whatever is going to
happen will happen’. If you understand whatever is ‘is’ and
whatever is not ‘is not’; then there will be no suspicions. And if
suspicion does arise, you can erase it. What is there to be
suspicious about when ‘what is’ is, and what ‘is not’ is not?
Why fret over whether ‘will it happen or will it not? Will it
happen or will it not? Will my losses come to an end?’ You fool,
What ‘is not’, is not. If your loss is going to break, it will and
if it is not meant to, then it will not. So why fret about it?
Therefore, there is no reason to be suspicious of what is and
what is not.
However, you cannot take the approach of vyavasthit by
saying, ‘don’t worry. Whatever is going to happen, will happen.’
You cannot say, ‘Only that which is meant to happen, will
happen.’ That is a one-track viewpoint. That is misuse of
vyavasthit. This mind, buddhi (intellect) etc., is ignorant by
nature and as long as there are such inner opponents, You
should remain alert.
Questioner: We worry about the future, ‘this is going to
happen’ or ‘it would be nice if this were to happen’. At such
times, can we say, ‘Do not worry, whatever will be in vyavasthit,
will happen?’
Dadashri: There is no need to say, ‘Whatever is in
vyavasthit, will happen’, because whatever ‘is’ is, and whatever
‘is not’ is not. So there is no need to think about that. What ‘is
not’ is not going to become ‘is’ and what ‘is’, is not going to
become ‘is not’, so then you don’t have to think about anything.
You become suspicion-free in that matter.
Besides, the future is under the control of vyavasthit. Is it
under our control?
There is no need to say, ‘that it will happen if it is in
vyavasthit’. But you can say, ‘what ‘is’ is and what is ‘is not’ is

100

Aptavani-9

not. If your finger is going to get hurt, then it will happen if that
‘is’ the case and it will not happen if that ‘is not’. Therefore, if
it ‘is not’ meant to happen, then it will not happen and if it does,
then we do not have any objections. And even if the world
raises objection, where will it go? You are not going to be able
to change anything by thinking about it. So whatever ‘is’ is and
that which ‘is not’ is not. However, if someone who does not
have this Gnan takes the wrong meaning of this, then he will do
a great deal of damage. This information is only for those who
have this Gnan (those who have attained Self-realization).
Just as we accept the knowledge of the eternal elements
which the Lord has said exists, and whatever He said is not
there, we accept it as such, similarly here too, whatever there is;
‘is’. Do you worry about what you will do if you do not find a
barber? Now if you do not find a barber for two or three
months, do you have to worry about whether you will find one
for the rest of your life? Is there a need to have such
multiplications (increase) in this way, by worrying about what
will happen if your hair keeps growing longer and longer?
Therefore, you will not experience any misery if you do
not have any suspicions or misgivings. What if you do not have
any suspicions? Push aside any suspicion that does arise; tell the
suspicions, ‘Why do you come here? I am here, so who asked
for your advice? Now I do not take advice from anyone, no
lawyer or any one else. I take advice only from Dada; that is all.
Whenever I have a problem, I tell Dada about it. I do not want
to give advice to anyone. Let others give it to me.’ And can
anything be done outside the laws of vyavasthit? So are you
now convinced that no one can do anything outside of
vyavasthit?
If you want to go to moksha…
So do not ever have suspicions about any one. Do not be
suspicious if you come home and see your sister talking to some

Aptavani-9

101

man. Suspicion causes the greatest of miseries and will uproot
your entire Gnan and throw it out. Nothing is going to happen
outside of vyavasthit. What is; is and what is not; is not. Instead
you can ask your sister to serve you your dinner and you can
separate the two in this way but you should never become
suspicious. Suspicion can only make you miserable. Whatever is
in vyavasthit is, and what is not, is not. Do not become
suspicious.
Questioner: But is suspicion not due to the fruition of
karma?
Dadashri: To have suspicions is not considered fruition
of karma. Suspicion is spoiling your inner intent; it means you
are meddling and therefore it will give you misery. Never have
any suspicions.
If someone is talking to your sister do not get suspicious
because now you want to go to moksha, and besides nothing is
going to happen outside of vyavasthit in one lifetime. It will
happen regardless of whether you have awareness of Gnan or
not. No change is going to occur whether you are a Gnani or
agnani. So there is no reason to have suspicions.
Questioner: Because nothing is going to change.
Dadashri: Yes, nothing is going to change and there is
great harm in suspicion.
Questioner: But there is no charging after this Gnan, is
there?
Dadashri: There is no charging, but there is ‘charging’ if
you harbor such suspicions for a very prolonged time to the
extent that you become shankashil (obsessed) with suspicion.
In this state your ego has arisen to the level of a worldly being,
Chandulal. You cannot have suspicions if you want moksha. Still
in the absence of Self-realization, that is exactly what happens.
Whereas here, you get the benefit of Gnan, you get the benefit

102

Aptavani-9

of freedom and only that which is destined to occur, will occur.
Therefore, there is no reason to have suspicions. You have to
stop being suspicious. Dada has said ‘no’ to suspicions.
It is your own weakness
Questioner: Suspicions first hurts one’s own self, does it
not?
Dadashri: Yes, suspicion destroys only the person who
is being suspicious. The other person has nothing to do with it.
What harm comes to the other person? He does not care, he
will tell you, ‘whatever is going to happen to me will happen,
why you are being suspicious?’
Now if you have suspicions, it is your weakness. It is
different if there is no weakness but there is always weakness in
humans, it is naturally present, no matter how little. When that
weakness goes away, you become God. There is only one thing;
he, whose weaknesses go away, is God.
Dada listens to suspicions through the magic
of Gnan
If a person becomes suspicious of ‘us’, is he likely to be
spared? It will haunt him even in sleep. Because of the purity
within ‘us’, ‘we’ can make others pure (shuddha) too. ‘We’ do
not have any problems even if someone has suspicions about
‘us’. Suspicion is his own weakness.
That is why Kaviraj has written:
‘Even though we are full of suspicions from a
misguided intellect, He (the Gnani) observed with the
profound magic of Gnan, And yet never punished us.
And He did not differentiate between Him and us.’
What is Kaviraj trying to say? When does suspicion about
Dada arise? It arises when there is wrong intellect.
This happened one time. ‘We’ had placed our hand on

Aptavani-9

103

one lady’s head just like ‘we’ do on the men. Her husband
became suspicious. Then ‘we’ may have unknowingly placed
the hand on her shoulder. He became suspicious again. The
suspicion of: ‘Dada’s intentions have turned bad’ started to play
on his mind. ‘We’ understood that this poor man had suspicions
in his mind, what can anyone do? We knew he must be
suffering.
So he wrote me a letter saying, ‘Dadaji, I am hurting in
this way so I would appreciate it if you do not do this anymore.
You being a Gnani cannot do this.’ Later when that man would
meet ‘us’, he would look at ‘us’ and realize that ‘Dada does not
seem to be affected’. Then he met ‘us’ again a few days later.
‘We’ greeted him with ‘Jai Sat Chit Anand’ as if nothing had
happened. This happened six or seven times and when he did
not see any effect on ‘us’ he got tired. He became very
confused from within, ‘what is all this about? I wrote him a letter.
He received it and read it and yet I cannot see an effect on him
at all.’
You silly man! Only the guilty one will be affected. How
can there be an effect on ‘us’ when ‘we’ are not guilty? No
matter how many letters you write or do whatever you can, ‘we’
have no problem. ‘We’ do not have an answer for the letter.
‘We’ have vitaragata - ‘we’ are detached. It is you who believes
otherwise. Then later he tells me, ‘Did anything happen to you?’
‘We’ told him, ‘What can happen to ‘us’? You have the
suspicion but ‘we’ are not involved in it and so ‘we’ do not have
a problem.’
That is why Kavi wrote ‘profound Gnan’. Other people
would be affected if someone were to write them such a letter.
Questioner: Yes, any other person would be shaken up.
Dadashri: Then what would become of that disciple?
Whereas this incident did not put a stain on his wife or me. The
time passed without a dent on anyone. The moment of suspicion

104

Aptavani-9

will pass one day, will it not? Does it ever remain forever?
Has Kavi not written a powerful sentence about what
suspicion is? This suspicion is of a misguided intellect. And I am
a Gnani Purush and yet that man became suspicious of even the
Gnani? Here the Gnani Purush makes you nihshank (free from
all suspicion. The Gnani makes everyone nihshank through the
knowledge of ‘my real Self is the Soul’), and still you have
suspicions about Him? But this is how the world is, what will
one not say? I would listen to such suspicions with the ‘magic’
of Gnan, and then I regard everything with vitaragata.
No separation between him and us, even
when reprimanding
Then what does Kavi go on to say?
“Even then He did not punish us by keeping a separation
of ‘me’ and ‘you’.”
Yes I have never punished anyone and I have never
maintained a separation of ‘you’ and ‘I’, or ‘you are like this,
why do you do this, why do you become suspicious?’ There is
nothing of the sort. I know that this is the way things always are
and that he simply has a misunderstanding.
In our satsangs, there has never been a separation of
‘You’ and ‘I’. So far, over all these years, this separation
(bheda) has never taken place. Man naturally makes a mistake
because he is full of mistakes and so what can the poor man do?
Yet, I have never said, ‘You are like this.’ When we say ‘you
and I’, we create divisions. That is the end of it! And here there
is complete oneness (abhedta). Do you not feel this oneness?
I do not have such a sense of separation. Otherwise, suspicion
will create differences and divisions. And suspicion over these
matters is a very grave mistake. Therefore, this statement is very
significant. With the Gnani, there is no, ‘Why are you like this?’
or ‘Why did you do such a thing?’ or ‘You’ and ‘me’; there is

Aptavani-9

105

no separation like this here. Amongst fifty thousand people
words such as ‘you’ and ‘I’, have never been used by ‘us’.
Questioner: But do we not see differences of ‘you’ and
‘I’ elsewhere in other religious gatherings?
Dadashri: That is all there is! What else can there be? As
long as there exist the differences of ‘you’ and ‘I’, there is the
presence of jivaatma (mortal state, non-Self-realized state).
When such differences go away one becomes parmatma – the
absolute Self. Parmatma, what else can there be? But if one
does not wish to become parmatma, he will keep the
differences of ‘you’ and ‘I’.
Even when a person may have had suspicion about ‘us’
through the wrong intellect, ‘we’ have never made the distinction
of ‘you’ and ‘I’. Everywhere in the world, if this were the case,
they will reprimand you to no end; ‘You are worthless!’ ‘You
are like this!’ ‘You are like that!’ It is like this everywhere,
except here. This path is a path of exception in every way.
Everywhere else a distinction between ‘you’ and ‘I’ are made.
Questioner: Whenever we become suspicious about
you, you are aware of that fact and yet why do you not keep
any separation (bheda) between us?
Dadashri: ‘We’ have the knowledge of: ‘This is a radish
and it has a certain distinct odor’ or ‘this is an onion and it has
a specific odor’. Don’t ‘we’ understand that? So then is it not
wrong to scold these ‘vegetables’ when they smell? An onion is
an onion, what is there to scold about it? A radish smells as it
is in its nature. If there is an onion over there, you will be able
to smell it sitting here; that is the nature of the onion. ‘We’ will
know such is its nature (swabhav).
If ‘we’ were to do anything wrong, then he (the one who
has suspicions about Dada) will no longer have our grace and
that will hurt him. ‘We’ will harm the very person ‘we’ have set

106

Aptavani-9

out to help. It is always ‘our’ deepest intent of ‘our’ life to never
hurt anything, even if it interferes with ‘our’ plans. If ‘we’ plant
a tree and later in planning for a road, that tree becomes an
obstruction, even then ‘we’ will not cut it down. We have no
choice but turn the direction of the road. ‘We’ will never uproot
a tree that ‘we’ have planted, nurtured and watered. ‘We’ just
have to circumvent that situation. All ‘we’ have to do is change
‘our’ plans.
This has been ‘our’ practice from the very beginning;
anything sown with ‘our’ own hands will never be removed by
the same hands. ‘We’ meet all kinds of human beings, do ‘we’
not?
One has endless suspicions. The world is such that there
is suspicion every step of the way. A man becomes suspicious
even if you accidentally put your hand on his wife. This will lead
to endless quarrels at home even if the poor lady is innocent.
Now how can you deal with such people? Therefore, should
anyone’s arm fall upon your wife, you should remove that
suspicion. How can you destroy suspicion? You can destroy
suspicion through the suspicion-less state (nihshankpanu). Tell
people that your suspicion went away through Dada’s state of
nihshankpanu.
Instead of being suspicious…
Suspicion is the gravest disease in this world.
Questioner: This is a great sentence of yours: ‘This
world is not worth becoming suspicious about.’
Dadashri: This world exists on suspicion; suspicion and
vengeance. There are certain words, which perpetuate the
worldly life; they keep people in bondage life after life. It is
better to slap someone than to be suspicious about him. The
consequences of a slap is realized when he slaps you back, but
the consequences of your suspicions will be such that you dig a

Aptavani-9

107

deeper hole for yourself. They linger on for a much longer time.
You will not be able to crawl out of it.
Even if it is true do not harbor suspicion
All these miseries are caused by suspicions. Suspicion will
show you all kinds of things about a person when it arises. It will
say, ‘He did such and such a thing.’ That suspicion will then eat
you away from the inside. Even if the other person has indeed
done something wrong and suspicion (shanka) about him
bothers you, just tell the suspicion, ‘hey shanka, you leave. He
is my brother.’
Questioner: If a man swears at me, how can I believe
that he did not swear at me? How can I convince my mind of
this?
Dadashri: You can never say that anyway! How can you
when in fact he did swear at you. There is no question about it.
But what am I saying? Do not be suspicious of him.
Suspicion even after entrusting someone?
If you ask someone on the train to take care of five
thousand rupees for you so that you can use the restroom, what
should you do when a suspicion of ‘what if he runs away with
the money?’ arises while you are in the restroom? You should
tell the suspicion, ‘Go away, I have given the five thousand
rupees. What is done is done! If the money is meant to go, it
will go and if it is meant to stay, it will.’ Suspicion makes you
create unnecessary bondage by seeing faults in the other person.
And if a person were to give money to someone like me for
safekeeping, what would become of him if he were to have
suspicions about me? Therefore, this world is not worth being
suspicious about, over anything.
When you remember what you loaned.
When you are in bed and suddenly at eleven o’clock in

108

Aptavani-9

the night, you get a thought, ‘I forgot to get an official document
for the five lakh rupees I had loaned. What if he does not sign
it tomorrow?’ That is it! Then you become like a living corpse.
Say a man pays you interest of a thousand rupees every
month on a principle of one hundred thousand he has borrowed
from you. This man incurs a loss of two or three hundred
thousand rupees in his business. Even though he sends you
payment of interest this month, knowing that he has sustained a
loss, if you suspect ‘What if he does not pay back the hundred
thousand? What will I do if he does not give me the money?’
Once this suspicion takes hold in your mind, where will it end?
A suspicion has no end, and it kills the one who suspects.
Suspicion will arise at odd times at night, what if he does
not return the money? This suspicion did not arise during the day
time and then it causes you misery when it arises at night. Was
there no misery, during the entire daytime? When you have given
the money, and if suspicion of, ‘will he return it or not?’ arises,
then you will feel the pain, will you not? Why did you have the
suspicion at night and not during the day?
Questioner: What is the reason?
Dadashri: It is our foolishness. If you are going to be
suspicious, then be suspicious constantly. Be suspicious with so
much awareness that you are suspicious from the time you lend
the money.
So if you lend a hundred thousand rupees to someone and
later at some point in time you feel that man is not reliable, even
then you should not let suspicion arise. ‘What is going to happen
now?’ is creating another suspicion. And what do you think is
going to happen? This body is going to go away and so is the
money. Is everything not going to go away eventually? Ultimately
you will have to cry. Ultimately, it will all burn in a pyre, will it
not? So then why are you killing yourself prematurely? Why not
live peacefully?

Aptavani-9

109

What do I do when such things happen to me? I tell
Ambalal, ‘Ambalal, deposit it in your account. Your money has
come!’ Rather than incur a loss from suspicion, it is better to
secretly deposit it in your account; do it discretely without the
knowledge of the other person.
Suspicion and astrology
Otherwise, people go to astrologers seeking help. An
Astrologer may say, ‘Look, how good all the stars are. Nothing
is going to happen to you. You will get your money back.’ And
so he will believe him. When the astrologer is not stable himself,
how is he going to predict the future for you? How is he going
to look into your future, when he does not know how to look
into his own future? When he wears worn out shoes, can you
not realize that he cannot see into his own future so how is he
going to look into your future? But they trap greedy people.
Just look at the vast influence these astrologers have. Even
powerful managers and CEOs believe in them. How can you
believe in them? How can you let them into your home? If you
let them enter your home, there will be grief, so you must not
let them in. Yes, you can tell them they are welcome as any
other guests but not in the capacity as astrologers. Come but
do not start looking at horoscopes or do any fortune telling.
Leave things the way they are. Do not adulterate what is going
on. No one knows what is going to happen in the future, so
how can he?

Nihshankta: total absence of suspicion
Therefore when suspicion arises, you will experience
misery. If a person does not know how to read account
books, he may see a profit of six hundred thousand as a loss
of four hundred thousand. Then would he not remain miserable
as long as he does not know how to read the ledger book? His
ignorance of how to read financial statements is the reason for
his misery. That is how the world is. The pain and suffering is

110

Aptavani-9

from not being able to read the ‘ledger book’ (of karmic
accounts). Otherwise, there is no pain or suffering in this
world.
The whole world lives in the atmosphere of suspicion,
‘this will happen and that will happen!’ Why do you fret
unnecessarily? Nothing is going to happen. Why not sleep
peacefully instead of tossing and turning needlessly? The faith
you have placed in yourself, ‘I am this body’, is one hundred
percent wrong. Nothing is going to happen and yet just look at
the amount of fear and anxiety people have; as if they are going
to take something with them when they leave this world.
The whole daylong they fret; ‘What is going to happen,
what is going to happen?’ Hey! What is going to happen? This
world has never fallen off; when the world falls, so will God and that is not going to happen.
What was that village in U.P. (the state of Uttar Pradesh)
that we came to at midnight, on our way to the pilgrimage in
Nepal?
Questioner: It was Bareli.
Dadashri: Yes. The police officers and other people of
Bareli told us to stop the bus. I asked them, ‘What is the
problem?’ They told us not to go any further and to spend the
night there because people were being robbed in the fifty-mile
radius. So I told them, ‘Let them rob us if they want to but we
are going forward.’ Finally, they told us to take two police
officers as escorts. I agreed and two police officers came with
us with guns but nothing happened. It is very difficult for a
circumstance of being robbed in a large group to occur and if
it were meant to happen, then even if you make thousands of
efforts to prevent it, your efforts would be in vain. So do not be
fearful, do not become suspicious. No work can be successful
until suspicions are removed. Nihshankta (absolute freedom
from suspicion) is the state of the Self, and until that state is

Aptavani-9

111

attained, one cannot become fearless. There is always fear
where there is suspicion.
No one will have suspicions of this kind
Ask any man in Mumbai whether he has a suspicion that
he is going to die. He will tell you no because that is one thought
he will throw out; he will uproot it from its main trunk and throw
it out. He knows that if such a suspicion arises, it will kill him.
Similarly, suspicions of any other kind are not worth having.
Pluck out all other suspicions that arise within; remove them the
moment they sprout. Become suspicion-free everywhere else.
However people will harbor all other suspicions from within but
the moment they begin to have suspicions about death, they
pluck it out; they will not let it sprout.
Solution from the Gnani Purush
If the business is going down, the owner worries and
suspects, ‘What will happen if the business goes down? What
will happen if the business goes in a loss?’ You fool! Do not
have suspicions. One will use the saying, ‘Those who are
successful will remain successful and those who are unsuccessful
will remain unsuccessful. The unsuccessful one will never
succeed and the successful one will never fail.’ Look what a
statement! But no, both positive and negative have to be there
otherwise no electricity will be produced. Anything that goes up
will come down and that which is down will go up. That is the
natural law.
Now that you have attained the knowledge to go to
moksha, make preparations for going there. Whenever any
suspicion arises, come and tell me, ‘Dadaji, I have such
suspicions and I will find a solution for you.’ Otherwise,
suspicion is a very dangerous thing. It is like a ghost. It is better
to be possessed by a ghost than by suspicion; at least someone
will be able to exorcise the ghost for you. Possession by the
ghost of suspicion cannot be removed.

112

Aptavani-9

Then have suspicion all the way to the end
This is our Atma Gnan! It is not an ordinary thing. It is a
wonderful thing that you have acquired! These (bhaav) feelings,
which arise from the mind and from the intellect, are the ones,
which create fear. You just have to know once, that these are
the ones that create fear. Buddhi (intellect) will create interference
as long as it is in operation. Does your intellect interfere?
Questioner: Sometimes it arises. The negative intellect
arises.
Dadashri: But you have realized that it is a wrong thing,
have you not?
Questioner: Yes, I have realized that much.
Dadashri: You have realized that it is wrong and all the
mischief it creates is wrong; have you not? You have realized
that it is not right. Yes when you realize all that, there is an effort
to move towards the Self. Still if the power from the other side
(intellect) is strong then it will destabilize you.
When you incur a loss in your business, you do not sit for
hours worrying about it, do you? When that phase (thoughts of
a loss) comes, you do not sit up for hours worrying, do you?
Questioner: Of course I do, but I get nowhere!
Dadashri: But it does stop, does it not?
Questioner: Then it stops.
Dadashri: Now when the worrying stops, is it because
you recovered the loss you had incurred that the phase of
worrying ends or is the loss still there and the phase of worrying
just comes to an end? Say, this is triggered by a loss of five
hundred rupees that you incurred. The worrying may go on for
twelve hours or two days but it will eventually come to an end.
So does the worrying stop after the amount of loss is recovered
or does it stop even when the loss is still there?

Aptavani-9

113

Questioner: The loss remains the same.
Dadashri: Then what is the point of stopping the
worrying? Should you not continue to worry until you recover
the loss?
Questioner: But worrying starts again on its own and it
stops on its own.
Dadashri: When it stops, you should again say, ‘Why
have you stopped when the loss has not been recovered? Come
back.’
There is no problem of thinking about the loss, but it is
only worth thinking about it to the point where you sustain no
personal inner loss. Otherwise if worrying and suspicion stop on
their own, even if the loss is still at hand, then there is no point
of worrying or having suspicion. It is best to stop worrying, right
from the beginning.
People tend to forget all the phases. They forget the past
as they proceed forward. ‘We’ do not forget even for a second,
even if the incident occurred some forty years ago. But people
forget. It is better to forget before nature forces you to do so.
It is fruition of karma that reminds you and it is also fruition of
karma that makes you forget. So ‘You’ should pat your relativeself on the back and tell your relative-self, Chandulal, ‘what is
‘is’ and what is ‘is not’ is not’, nothing is going to change that
which is in vyavasthit.
Therefore if you are going to worry, worry your whole life
otherwise do not. Worry about incurring a loss until it is
recovered. But like a top (toy), we remain under control of
other things and the worrying stops on its own, what is that all
about? If your worrying stops on its own even before the loss
is recovered, then why not put a stop to it from the beginning?
Does it not stop before the loss ends?
Questioner: Yes.

114

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: Then you have to ask the ‘worrier’, ‘Why did
you stop? Why did you start in the first place? Now that you
have started, let it go till the loss is recovered.’
…otherwise do not harbor suspicions
‘We’ had understood one thing even before attaining
Gnan. Once I had become suspicious about one man. I felt that
he was going to cheat me. Then I came to a decision that if I
was going to be suspicious then I should be suspicious
throughout my life otherwise I should not do it at all. If you are
going to be suspicious, be that way throughout your life. That is
what the Lord considers awareness. If suspicion is going to end
once it starts, then do not even start it. If you leave Baroda to
go to Kashi-Banaras but return home half way, from Mathura,
it would have been better if you had never left. So from the day
I became suspicious of that man, from that time onwards, I do
not harbor any suspicions. Otherwise I would not have any
more dealings with him. I would not be cheated anymore. If I
wanted to continue being suspicious, then I would avoid worldly
interaction with that person for the rest of my life.
Be cautious but not suspicious
Questioner: We have to maintain awareness when we
are driving, do we similarly not have to maintain awareness in
our worldly dealings, such as ‘If I do it this way, will this man
take advantage of me’? Do we not have to keep that in our
awareness?
Dadashri: You have to be cautious and aware but do not
have suspicions. You do not need to be preoccupied with the
suspicion of ‘what if he takes advantage of me?’ Suspicion is
very harmful. You just have to be cautious. Suspicion will cause
you misery the moment it arises.
Questioner: Often problems arise at work and they are
such that we begin to have suspicions about certain people and
that causes continuous unhappiness within.

Aptavani-9

115

Dadashri: Yes, those are baseless suspicions. Two
things happen in suspicions. First, it causes unhappiness and
the other is that you bind a negative karma because of your
suspicions. The law is that it takes one to a birth in the lower
life form.
Questioner: But at work when we have to construct a
road or a bridge, do we not have to account for all the safety
factors? If we don’t, the bridge may collapse. It is not
acceptable for us to be unaware and build a bridge, is it?
Dadashri: That is correct. Keep all the safety factors but
having done that, suspicions must not arise again. It will give rise
to misery if they do.
Questioner: But in anything we do, do we not have to
worry and think things through to ensure that the other person
does not make any mistakes?
Dadashri: Yes, you have all the freedom to think but not
to be suspicious. Think as much as you want, even if you want
to spend the whole night thinking but do not become suspicious
because there is no end to it. Suspicion is endless whereas
thoughts will end. The mind becomes tired does it not? The mind
gets tired from thinking too much and so it will stop on its own.
Suspicions do not get tired or exhausted. Suspicions will
be about one person or another, so do not have any suspicions.
There is no other misery like that of suspicion. Suspicion first
harms the owner (the one who has suspicions) and then it harms
others. I had discovered from the very beginning that having
suspicion is very harmful.
Never have suspicions, even when knowing
everything
That is why ‘we’ have never had any suspicions towards
anyone. ‘We’ will check everything out in minute details, but we
never become suspicious. Those who have suspicions suffer.

116

Aptavani-9

‘We’ know everything but ‘we’ do not have any suspicions. You
should not have the slightest of suspicions. ‘We’ have not had
any suspicion about anybody. ‘We’ know everything; there is
nothing ‘we’ do not know. ‘We’ know everything about
everyone down to his or her deepest levels. ‘We’ can see
everything but ‘we’ do not have any suspicions. What good is
suspicion?
Questioner: It is very harmful.
Dadashri: What damage does it cause?
Questioner: Does it not harm one’s own self?
Dadashri: No, but how much happiness does it give?
The moment suspicion enters one’s mind it is the same as
becoming possessed; ‘he has taken my things for sure!’ enters
your mind. Whatever is to become of the other person, let it be
so, but you become possessed by suspicion in the process. This
Dada is very particular; He will never have suspicions about
anyone. He knows everything but He will not have any
suspicions.
The ‘doer’ and the ‘sayer’ are separate
You will incur a great liability, and hence it is a tremendous
fault to have any kind of suspicions in this worldly life. Nothing
is gained by suspicion. Now that you have attained this Gnan,
why not continue doing your work with a mind free of
suspicions! If you employ the intellect you will ruin the work at
hand and if you let it occur naturally (sahaj) then everything will
work out on its own. Instead of doing your work with suspicion,
it will work out better if you leave it alone and let it happen
naturally; let it happen without employing any buddhi (intellect).
No work is done if there is the slightest of suspicion.
Questioner: Still what should one do if suspicions
(shanka) and negative suspicions (kushanka) keep occurring in
any work?

Aptavani-9

117

Dadashri: That verily is the one thing that is destructive,
is it not? It can place you in difficulty.
Questioner: But what should we do?
Dadashri: What can you do? ‘You’ have to tell
‘Chandulal’, ‘do not be suspicious. Do whatever comes along.’
That is all. ‘You’ are there along with Chandulal to caution him.
Before there was no one to guide Chandulal and that is why you
were confused but now there is.
Fearlessness is required there
Do not initiate any task that invites suspicion. Wherever
suspicion occurs, do not proceed with that work or stop that
work.
Say a group of pilgrims are leaving for Ahmedabad from
here. Some in the group say, ‘We will not reach there if it rains.’
What do you have to do with such people who are inclined
towards suspicion? If there are two or three such people, you
have to send them back or else they will ruin the whole group.
Nothing can be achieved as long as there is presence of
suspicion. A person with suspicion will not be able to do any
work. He may be able to turn around with a lot of effort, and
if he does, that is good. Then everyone will be happy.
If a person is fearless, then if someday he decides to take
matters in his own hands, he will be able to accomplish whatever
he sets his mind to. Therefore, you should have fearlessness
such that you are convinced that nothing can happen to you. If
you want to take poison then you can but who is going to make
you take it if you do not want to?
If your driver tells you, ‘What if we have an accident?’
You should tell him, ‘Stop the car and get out of the car.’ You
should not let such a person even touch anything. Do not go
around with such a person; he will ruin your mind. Why should
there be any suspicion? The mind should be clear and without

118

Aptavani-9

suspicions. Any kind of thoughts may come but are we not the
Purush (the Soul; the Self)? Man will die if he is not a Purush.
Having become a Purush (attained the Self), how can you have
suspicion in your purusharth? How can you have suspicion
about your own Self? Why should you have any fear after
becoming the Purush? For you the state of swa-purusharth and
swa-parakram have arisen, i.e. for you, you have come into
your own domain as the Soul; you are the ‘Knower’ and the
‘Observer’ and your energies of the Self have arisen, so why
fear anything?
Questioner: Do we have to maintain fearlessness or
does this state automatically remain?
Dadashri: You have to maintain it. Even if you do not
think about the possibility of an accident, is it going to stop from
occurring if it was meant to? And what about the person who
thinks about it? It will occur for him too. But a person who sits
in the car without having such thoughts is what we call fearless.
Such people are likely to get less injured and will come out of
the situation with minor injuries.
After sitting in a train, does a suspicion of ‘two days ago
there was a train accident, what if that happens today?’ arise?
Why does such suspicion not arise? Therefore do not have any
suspicion in any work that you have to do and if you have
suspicion, then do not attempt that work. Do either this or that.
How can we accept such things? To anyone who talks this way
with suspicion, tell him, ‘Not here, go home.’ We need talks of
fearlessness (shooraatan) here.
You want to go home and if someone keeps saying,
‘What happens if we have an accident on our way home?’ Then
what will become of everyone’s minds? Do not allow such talks.
Why should you have such suspicions?
If you are walking along a beach and someone says,
‘what if a huge wave comes and washes us away?’ Someone

Aptavani-9

119

may have told him about an incident where a person drowned
in a big wave. So what happens if you start to become
suspicious? These are all foolish talks. It is a fool’s paradise!
So there should be no suspicion in the work you are doing
and if suspicion does arise, then do not proceed with that work.
Your work will not be successful from the moment you start to
have suspicions about your work. Suspicion that prevails is a
nuisance caused by the intellect (buddhi).
Besides, such things do not happen. Problems are created
for those in whom suspicion arises. The rule of the ‘king of
karma’ is that he will visit the one who has suspicions. He will
not stay where there is no tuber of suspicion. Therefore, keep
a strong mind.
Precaution is taken by the worldly self, not
‘You’ - the real Self
Suspicion causes tremendous misery. When can you get
rid of it? If you have been mugged and robbed of your
expensive jewelry, then when you go out again wearing
expensive jewelry, suspicion of ‘what if I get robbed today?’ will
arise. Now what does nature’s justice say? If you are going to
encounter such a robber as a consequence of your karma from
your past life, then you have no choice but to meet him, so why
become suspicious needlessly?
Questioner: Should one not take precautions when such
suspicion arises?
Dadashri: Everything gets ruined because of taking
precautions. It is fine for someone who has not taken Gnan. If
you want liberation then ‘do’ everything exactly for reaching that
goal. If you want to remain in the worldly life then make the
worldly adjustments (take precaution). If you want to harbor
suspicions, then remain in the worldly life. Be on one side of the
shore or the other, it is meaningless to be in the middle.

120

Aptavani-9

Questioner: But if there are signs of danger, I may not
let suspicion arise but should I not take the necessary precaution
against it?
Dadashri: You cannot take precautions. You do not have
the energy or the power to take precautions. What is the point
of trying to adopt the energy you do not have?
Questioner: Do we not have the power to take
precautions?
Dadashri: Absolutely none! There is no point in believing
in the power You do not possess. There is no power to take
precaution or to do anything else in You, and besides the
precautions are taken by ‘Chandulal’ anyway. You are meddling
unnecessarily. Someone else does it and You take on the doership and that is why things get ruined.
Questioner: So if ‘Chandulal’ takes precautions, is there
not a problem?
Dadashri: He will do so for sure. He will always take
precautions. A man may be walking inattentively but if he sees
a snake, he will immediately jump aside. What is the energy that
makes him jump? Who makes him jump? Do people not jump
in this manner? There is so much natural response (sahajikata)
in this body. This ‘Chandulal’ has so much naturalness, that he
will jump the moment he sees something.
Questioner: But such naturalness does not come in our
business interactions and other worldly interactions.
Dadashri: That is because of Your meddling (dakho).
If you are going to have suspicion, then have suspicions of
all kinds, like ‘Brother, what if I die tomorrow?’ Do people not
die?
Questioner: They do.
Dadashri: So if you are going to have suspicion, then

Aptavani-9

121

have suspicions of all kinds. Why have suspicions of only one
kind? What can you not have suspicions about in this world?
What is not worth being suspicious about? There is no guarantee
that you will reach home safely once you leave here. Why do
you not have suspicion there? There should never be any
suspicions whatsoever. Therefore, you should tell suspicions,
‘Go away. I am nihshank – the suspicion-less Self.’ How can
the Self ever have any suspicion?
From a seed to a jungle
What am I saying is that suspicion is like a ghost. You can
let other ‘witches’ possess you if you want to, if you can afford
to do so but what should You tell the ghost of suspicion that
arise within you? Say to ‘Chandulal’, ‘Why do you have such
suspicions now that you are a Dada’s follower? Are you not
ashamed? Dada, at his age, does not have suspicions about
anyone and you being so young, why do you keep any? Stop
them!’ Suspicions will cease when You talk like this.
‘We’ got rid of all suspicions in life. ‘We’ do not get
suspicious towards anyone. Is that a safe side or not?
Questioner: A huge safe side!
Dadashri: Not a word of suspicion. Even when ‘we’ see
someone take money from someone’s pocket, ‘we’ will not
have suspicion towards him. Even if someone does a lot of harm
to ‘us’, ‘we’ will not have any suspicions. ‘We’ would know for
sure; it would be in our Gnan, ‘This is like this and this is like
that,’ but no suspicion.
Suspicion is a very harmful thing and it can give rise to a
new kind of worldly life. Only a banyan tree will grow from a
banyan seed and only an oak tree from a single oak seed. But
a seed of suspicion will give rise to seventeen hundred types of
‘vegetation’. How can you ever harbor such a seed? ‘We’ are
the only one who has removed the seed of suspicion completely.
But suspicions arise within you from time to time, does it not?

122

Aptavani-9

So be like ‘us’. Remove suspicion, no matter what it is,
even when you have seen something with your own eyes; You
should simply know (janvoo) it all. There is nothing wrong in
knowing and what you see with your eyes can sometimes be
wrong. ‘We’ have experienced exactly that kind of problems.
So can you believe other things? Therefore; do not become
suspicious even when you see things with your own eyes. Just
‘know’ it. This is ‘our’ very deep and profound discovery. Only
if ‘we’ talk about these things, will you experience them.
Suspicion has not been removed from people of this world.
Only a Gnani, having become absolutely suspicion-free, can help
remove suspicion in others; no one else can do so. Man cannot
remove suspicion by himself. It is the worst ghost. It is the
biggest demon.
What happens if you see a man walking with his arm
around a lady? That poor man is the only one who knows why
his arm is around her. But what will you think? How many other
seeds will sprout from that one seed of suspicion? Suspicion is
worse than a demon. It is better to be possessed by a demon;
at least an exorcist will be able to remove the demon but who
can remove suspicions? ‘We’ can remove your suspicions for
you, no one else can.
Questioner: Suspicion arises when we think about the
past.
Dadashri: Do not think about the past. You should forget
about the past. Even a Brahmin will not read old astrology
calendars. If you ask a Brahmin, ‘Was it fifteen days ago that
our daughter became a widow?’ he will reply, ‘No one asks
those kind of question. That is all past and gone.’
Questioner: But sometimes suspicion does arise.
Dadashri: Yes alas it does, but how many trees sprout
from that? The seed is only one, but the vegetation that sprouts
from it is of countless types.

Aptavani-9

123

Questioner: It becomes a jungle.
Dadashri: Yes, it will become a jungle. A garden
becomes a jungle. Dada creates a garden with great difficulty
and then it turns into a jungle. A huge garden like this and it turns
into a jungle? Arey! Dada has become exhausted planting rose
bushes one by one, so take care that you do not let it turn into
a jungle. Do not let it turn into a jungle. You won’t let it, will
you?
Questioner: Dada, I do not like having suspicions at all,
but it remains pending because it does not come to a closure.
Dadashri: Does it remain pending? Do you not bring an
end to it? Just as in Algebra we do not leave any denominator
with ‘a², b², this too is like that. Those who know algebra will
know about all this.
All your troubles and miseries arise from your suspicions,
and then does that ever ruin your sleep?
Questioner: It is not like that, but it comes back if it is
not settled.
Dadashri: What will you do now? Why don’t you ‘roast’
the seeds so they do not sprout again? A roasted seed will never
sprout. Problems arise only when the seeds germinate, do they
not?
So you should say to your relative self, ‘Are you not
ashamed being a follower of Dada?’ or you should say, ‘I will
slap you, why are you being suspicious?’ You should scold your
relative self in this way. What is wrong in You doing the scolding
rather than someone else doing it? Who would you prefer did
the scolding, You or someone else?
Questioner: These suspicions do not leave even after we
take a beating.
Dadashri: Yes, it will not go away even after you take a

124

Aptavani-9

beating. That is why this discussion came out. Such talk comes
out when suspicion is ready to go away and not otherwise.
Do everything systematically but do not be suspicious.
What would happen if you make a small mistake or invite
trouble standing on the railway tracks?
Questioner: Everything will get cut up or torn up.
Dadashri: How well do people behave in that situation?
Why do people behave in these situations? It is because their
actions will give instant results (fruits) but the fruit of suspicion
comes much later. One cannot see its results today and that is
why he invites troubles. Is it an ordinary thing to invite trouble
through suspicion?
Questioner: Does it not sow a seed for the future,
Dada?
Dadashri: Why are you talking about the future? If you
invite troubles through being suspicious today, it will multiply
endlessly. Suspicion will show you negative things even about
the Gnani Purush. Once this ‘witch of suspicion’ enters, what
will it not show you?
Questioner: It will show us everything.
Dadashri: It will show you negative things about Dada
too. Even a single suspicion towards Dada will send a person to
a lower life form. You cannot afford to have even the slightest
suspicion about this Dada; such a one He is. There can never
be a suspicion-less (nihshank) person like Dada in this world.
Questioner: You say that suspicions merely arise and
that no one does them deliberately.
Dadashri: That is a different thing. Why it happens is a
different matter, but you cannot have suspicions towards this
Dada. If you do, then you have to find a solution for it. I have
given you the solution. I am saying that suspicions do occur but
you have to solve them by saying, ‘Dada, I ask for your

Aptavani-9

125

forgiveness. I should not have any suspicion about you, but I still
have them.’ Should there not be such a solution? Dada is an
amazingly astonishing human being of this current time cycle. He
is a wonder of all wonders.
Today would you be able to sell only pure ghee? What a
strange and peculiar time this is. You will not be able to afford
even the rent for your shop if you try to sell only pure ghee.
They will sell a lot faster if the goods are adulterated. This
religion, our Akram Vignan is real. People will be able to take
advantage of it as the fruits of their good deeds mature. Their
good deeds are going to mature; that is inevitable.
The world is roasting in a fire pit. How much ‘roasting’
does a person experience when suspicions arise?
Questioner: Too much.
Dadashri: Are they being roasted or being eaten alive?
Questioner: They are being eaten alive also.
Dadashri: So watch out! Do not have suspicions about
any one. This world is not worth having suspicions at all.
Suspicions occur when you look deep into something. Once
suspicion enters, only when it leaves will there be any good for
you. Now, it cannot leave on its own. You do not have the power
to remove it. Only the Gnani Purush can remove it for you; no
one else can. Those with lesser amount of buddhi (intellect) will
not be bothered by suspicion. In whom does suspicion occur?
It is a problem for those with excess buddhi. Before ‘we’
attained Gnan, I used to have suspicions every step of the way.
Therefore; there is less external suffering for those who do
not have awareness and those who are very aware, due to their
excess buddhi, have a lot of externally induced suffering
(upadhi). Does awareness end up being beneficial or harmful?
Questioner: It is very beneficial but one should get rid of
it if it causes suspicion.

126

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: Get rid of the awareness? Do you want to get
rid of awareness or suspicion?
Questioner: Only the suspicion.
Dadashri: Yes, you want to keep the awareness, do you
not? ‘We’ have removed all roots of suspicion. Have you
removed it from its main root or have you kept some of it?
Questioner: A lot of introspection was going on about
suspicion within.
Dadashri: But have you not uprooted it yet?
Questioner: Today, I found a nimit (external evidence)
through Dada.
Dadashri: Yes that must be the case otherwise such talks
would not surface. Besides, do I talk about this only at certain
times? It comes out only when all the evidences come together.
It comes out only when an end to it is approaching, both for you
and for the other person. The time for you to have a closure
must be here, only then would such talks come out.
Otherwise, suspicion will not let you sleep the whole
nightlong.
Questioner: It eats away on the inside and even after all
the suffering; it still does not go away.
Dadashri: What do you gain out of it?
Questioner: There is no gain.
Dadashri: Yet it still remains, does it not? Why did this
discussion occur? ‘We’ did not realize how rampant suspicion
is. Because of the Gnan ‘we’ have given you, you can get rid
of little things yourself; whatever bites you, you can get rid of.
Now that you have Gnan, would you not be able to tell when
something is gnawing away at you? That which hurts and jabs
you from within like a jagged pebble, would You not know
about it? Would You not get rid of it? Would You allow it to stay?

Aptavani-9

127

Questioner: No, I will get rid of it.
Dadashri: It will not remain anymore, will it?
A suspicion-laden mind is separate and ‘You’
are separate
Questioner: The effect of suspicion is felt instantly but
will that effect take place in the next life too?
Dadashri: One reaps the fruits of the seeds he sows.
Therefore destroy the seed altogether. If a seed of suspicion
sprouts, you can recognize it and distinguish it from all other
types of seeds. Uproot it and throw it away so that no new
seeds come from it. Only when the fruit comes, will new seeds
come.
Questioner: So then it will not create an effect in the next
life?
Dadashri: There will be no effect in the next life if the
seed is not sown (no cause). A seed was sown (cause was
created) in your past life and that is why it gives rise to the effect
of suspicion in this life. So do not allow any seed to be sown.
This world is not worth having suspicion over, so go to sleep
peacefully.
Questioner: It is not until one attains the vision free of
suspicion (nihshank drashti) that he sees the world without any
fault (nirdosh).
Dadashri: That is why I see people as flawless; without
faults. Now that you have become Shuddhatma; the pure Soul,
the mind will not change. The mind however, is in the form of
a discharge. If the mind has become suspicion-laden (shankashil);
it will be suspicious and if it shows you negative things, it is
negative, but there is no need to be afraid. ‘You’ should just
observe it. It will say, ‘I will die.’ So what? You should say,
‘whatever happens, will happen and I don’t have any problems
with that either’ – this is what You have to say.

128

Aptavani-9

Purity through pratikraman
Questioner: But sometimes a knot of suspicion is formed
in the prakruti itself, how can that be untangled?
Dadashri: What Dada is saying is not to have any
suspicions, if however it arises, you have to say, ‘Go to Dada!’
Even when such circumstances arise, the circumstance and You
are separate.
Questioner: Suspicions about someone will arise even
when I don’t want it to, so how can that suspicion be
eliminated?
Dadashri: In that situation, you have to recall the other
person’s pure Self, and ask for His forgiveness and do
pratikraman. This suspicion arises because of the mistake you
made in your past life.
Questioner: Whatever consequences we have to suffer
because of our past karmas, is the suffering reduced by
repeated pratikraman?
Dadashri: Yes. And ‘You’ do not have to suffer it. ‘You’
tell ‘Chandulal’, ‘Do pratikraman’, and it will be reduced. The
more pratikraman you do, the more it is reduced, until it is
completely gone.
Everyone comes together as a consequence of their past
karmas. Neither a Gnani nor an agnani can change anything, so
why should you incur double the loss?
Questioner: Dada, you are right, you said that the world
has been this way from the very beginning.
Dadashri: There is nothing else to it. It appears the way
it does because it has been covered up, but really suspicion kills
people. Therefore, do not allow suspicion to arise and do
pratikraman. Do pratikraman for any suspicion that arises
towards someone.

Aptavani-9

129

Suspicion that never goes away charges new
karma
Questioner: You have said that after Gnan all worldly
interactions are a discharge; that is true. But when there is
inappropriate conduct or interaction, where does the danger of
charging anew lie in that?
Dadashri: There is nothing in the world that poses a
danger of charging, but charging of a new karma can occur
when suspicion arises. If suspicion takes hold, know that there
is a danger of charging new karmas. Now what kind of
suspicion are we talking about? It is suspicion that does not let
you sleep. Those are not trivial suspicions, they are not
suspicions that come and go. Suspicions that come and are
forgotten have no significance.
Questioner: Does that mean we should remain carefree?
Can we be fearless and careless?
Dadashri: No, if you become careless and carefree, you
will suffer. Why do you not put your hands on burning
charcoals?
Questioner: Then what kind of a remedial action should
be taken there?
Dadashri: What other actions will you take? Repentance
and pratikraman are the only ‘actions’ you can take.
Questioner: So what is the independent internal effort
(purusharth) after attaining Gnan? Do we have to continue
repenting or should we leave it to the charging mind (bhaavmun)?
Dadashri: The bhaavmun (charging mind) does not
remain after Gnan. But people whose Gnan is weak do have a
little of bhaavmun left, otherwise there is no bhaavmun after
Gnan. If the result of Gnan is weak, if you did not hear the Gnan
completely or properly or you did not speak the Gnan sentences
completely during the Gnan Vidhi, then the Gnan is weak inside.

130

Aptavani-9

Sometimes even a brand new engine will not run, does that
happen or not?
So repenting is all that is needed and You are not the one
repenting. You have to make the non-self (Chandulal) do the
repenting. Tell him, ‘You must repent. You are like this and like
that.’ That is what You have to tell ‘Chandulal’. Is anyone likely
to complain about You if You scold Chandulal in this manner?
The non-Self was and is separate from the
Self
So suspicion will make everything cling to you, to your
relative self. The internal enemies of anger, pride, attachment and
greed within will surround you and imprison you. All those
internal enemies are inanimate (achetan bhaav, jada bhaav).
What can the inanimate, the non-Self, do to the animate
(chetan, the Self)?
Unnecessary thoughts, which carry you away, will not
come now that You have become the Self, and if they do, You
do not have to listen to them. They are all related to the body
complex (pudgal), they are the intent (bhaav) of the non-Self
(pudgal bhaav). So do not submit to them. Nobody will bother
You. It is just like a barking dog. An elephant will not turn
around if a dog barks at it; it will realize that it is just a dog. If
there are two hundred dogs barking behind an elephant, will the
elephant turn around to see who is barking? That is how these
pudgal bhaavs are. They will bother an agnani (those who do
not have Self-realization) because he has not become an
‘elephant’ (the Self) yet. An agnani will get involved (affected)
with them, immediately.
‘No body has the power to do anything’ to have this
bhaav is fearlessness (shoorvirata). Everything else is matter
(jada) and You are chetan, the Self. You are the one with
infinite energy!

Aptavani-9

131

Questioner: We will tackle those thoughts when they
come!
Dadashri: How will they come in the first place? You will
not have to tackle them even if they come; You have nothing to
do with them. They are of a different caste and so are You.
Different caste and different lineage! So nothing can happen, in
fact nothing really happens either. One has not even seen
anything happen. All are just suspicions and that too it is merely
a pudgal bhaav i.e. it is all inanimate and of the non-Self.
Nothing happens to You and it is a waste of time and energy.
Yes indeed if it were of the chetan bhaav; of the Self, it would
overcome You but that is not so, so then? What can the
inanimate do to the animate? It would be a different matter if it
were chetan. The Gnan says that all that anoints, the anointing
tendencies of the mind-speech-body are inanimate - ‘manvachan-kayana tammam lepaymaan bhaavo, ey jada na
bhaavo chhe’ and the ‘Self’ is nirleyp i.e. it can never be
affected; it can never be anointed. So what is going to anoint
you? Do we not say that the inanimate bhaav are those of the
prakruti (non-Self)?
Questioner: Yes we do.
Dadashri: Then the questions and the speculation of
‘what could it be, what could it not be?’ would never arise. All
the anointing tendencies of the mind-body-speech are inanimate
attributes, tendencies of matter (the non-Self); they are not of
the Self. Their form, their caste and their guise are different.
What do they have to do with You?
Awareness of Gnan against suspicion
Questioner: Now after Gnan, what do we have to do,
when suspicion arises?
Dadashri: You just have to continue to ‘see’ that
suspicion has arisen.

132

Aptavani-9

Questioner: Should we not show our opposition towards
the suspicion?
Dadashri: You don’t have to do anything! The adjustments
will be taken on their own. You just have to keep observing,
‘Oh ho! Chandulal has suspicion.’ When suspicion arises, he is
always in serious torment (santaap). He is in tremendous
misery. The Lord has said that suspicion is the biggest mistake
that gives instant misery. That suspicion will give misery to the
other person whenever it will, but before it does, it will cause
tremendous misery to the one having suspicion. By retaliating
(pratibhav), the pain of suspicion will increase.
Questioner: So do we have to remain separate with
awareness at the time of suspicion?
Dadashri: You have to remain separate at that time but
also you have to remain separate all other times too. Try to
remain separate for one day; try to do it one day out of the
week. Then you will realize that there is nothing to it if you have
to do it the next day. You will not fall.
Questioner: The problem is not with the falling; it is with
the entanglements it creates.
Dadashri: The entanglement is due to your prior
practices and habits and that is why it does not go away. It does
not leave. But there is no need for suspicion now.
Questioner: Does suspicion get destroyed when I remain
separate?
Dadashri: Yes, suspicion dissipates on its own.
Questioner: So from now on all that is needed is for us
to maintain this awakened awareness (jagruti after Gnan).
Dadashri: The ‘seer’ (jonaar) is always aware. If one is
a ‘seer’ then he is jagrut (awake). One is knower-seer (gnatadrashta) only when he is aware or awake. Otherwise, the

Aptavani-9

133

suffering he has to endure is correspondingly proportionate to
the lack of awareness (ajagruti).
Opposing suspicion about the other person
Questioner: If someone is suspicious about me, how can
I solve the problem?
Dadashri: If you have knowledge of his suspicion
towards you then you should forget about that knowledge. That
knowledge should be forgotten. How do you know whether he
has suspicions about you or not?
Questioner: What if he tells me directly on my face that
he has suspicions about certain things about me?
Dadashri: If he tells you on your face then tell him, ‘You
have the suspicion. You will suffer from it. If you keep
suspecting, you will be the sufferer.’ Just say this much and
whatever happens after that, what can you do? No one will be
suspicious of you if your conduct is good. That is the principle
of the world. Your conduct had been inappropriate sometime or
other in the past and that is why the suspicion is there. It is as
if a person made a mistake when he was twenty-five years old
but his case is heard in court when he is sixty. That is how
everything is. Therefore, whenever a person has suspicion about
you, it is your own fault.
Questioner: Do I have to ask him why he is suspecting
me?
Dadashri: There is no joy in asking. You should not ask.
You should immediately realize that it is your own fault.
Otherwise, why would he have suspicion? Many people are
suspected of stealing things even though they do not steal.
Therefore, they must have been thieves in their past. Otherwise,
suspicion would not arise.
Questioner: What can I do if the other person sees it
that way?

134

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: No, the faulty vision is not of the other person.
It is the result of your own mistake. The world is not so unjust
that others will see you with suspicion if you are innocent. The
world is absolutely just; it is just every second.
Applying the principle, ‘Fault is of the sufferer’ will solve
this problem. You have to ‘see’ who is suffering: the one
suspecting or the one being suspected.
Questioner: My understanding is that all these questions
and suspicions arise because one is not following the five Agnas
of Dada properly.
Dadashri: Yes, otherwise they will never arise. There is
nothing if you practice the five Agnas. Any deficiency in
practicing the Agnas will give rise to those things. Thousands of
people who practice these Agnas live in internal and external
harmony (samadhi).
The world remains suspicion less where
suspicion is needed
There is only one place where there is a need for
suspicion and that is to question yourself ‘Am I really
Chandulal?’ that is the only suspicion you need to continue to
have. That is not suicide.
Questioner: Suspicion on, ‘I am Chandulal’…
Dadashri: Then your work is done. Nobody has this
suspicion, even when I question them repeatedly about who they
are, they just tell me, ‘I am Chandulal.’ This suspicion about
their identity never arises, does it?
When I keep stirring this issue, then the suspicion arises
and one starts to think, ‘What Dada is saying is correct; there
is some truth in it.’ Otherwise, one will never begin to have
suspicions about his real identity.
Questioner: Is it necessary for that suspicion to arise
before one can progress further?

Aptavani-9

135

Dadashri: No, not like that. These words are specifically
for that suspicion; the words ‘Am I Chandulal?’ is helpful to him.
All other suspicion is suicide. If the suspicion, ‘Am I really
Chandulal… am I really a son... a father… like the world says
I am?’ arises, then it is worth it.
So which suspicion is worth having? Suspicion related to
the self, ‘Is this the atma (soul, the real Self) or that is the atma?’
Until one realizes the Atma (the Self), he will continue to have
suspicions, just as the world does.
All accusations are made because of the belief ‘I am
Chandulal for sure. I am decidedly (nischaya thi - in reality)
Chandulal. I am truly Chandulal.’ But now suspicion has arisen
about this identity, has it not? A real doubt (vahem) has arisen
in this matter, has it not? This suspicion will attain your work of
Self-realization. No one gets doubts in this matter. No one will
have suspicions in this matter even when one tries to.
How can such suspicion arise? Arey! Even the authorities,
the government allows this blunder to continue. They will
announce, ‘Is Chandulal present?’ and so Chandulal will stand
up and the authorities will accept that. But he will never
suspect that he is not Chandulal and that he is holding on to
the wrong thing.
There is nothing in the outside world that will allow one
to suspect one’s identity of, ‘Am I really Chandulal?’ Even
legal documents endorse that he is Chandulal. When so many
people accept this, how can he then have any suspicion about
this?
Doubt over wrong knowledge
The one who creates doubts about one’s own knowledge
(of ‘I am Chandulal’) is a Gnani. Your own knowledge is never
wrong, is it? But a Gnani can do everything and that is why you
will have doubts within you; he will raise doubt about your own

136

Aptavani-9

knowledge (about your identity). Your work is done once that
wrong belief is removed.
One man told me, ‘I have never had any suspicions about
my ‘self’. Today I do.’ I asked him, ‘A real doubt has fallen
today on your knowledge that you are Chandulal, has it not?’
Doubt means a crack has occurred. So should a crack not
appear in the knowledge of ‘I am Chandulal’? This suspicion
must arise. One has to be absolutely suspicion free (nihshank)
about the real knowledge, of ‘I am the Soul; that is my real
Self’. People on the other hand, remain absolutely suspicion free
about the wrong knowledge of, ‘I am Chandulal.’
So when a doubt arises over the knowledge that has been
known so far, then ‘we’ know that that knowledge is going to
collapse. The knowledge in which doubt (vahem) and suspicion
(shanka) falls, that knowledge is going to dissipate. There has
to be knowledge that allows no suspicions. And that knowledge,
which is real, will never have any suspicions. Sometimes, due to
a veil of ignorance, one may not be able to understand, but that
is a different matter altogether. Otherwise, no suspicion can ever
occur in the knowledge that is real. This knowledge is Gnan, the
Self. It is because therein lies the Self.
Doubt only over the ego
There has never been doubt over the ego. Doubt occurs
over everything but not over the ego. Doubt over the belief of,
‘This Chandulal is I’ is considered doubt over the ego.
And you are not to get rid of your doubt over Chandulal;
you simply have to keep it ‘dramatic’. A performer playing the
role of King Bhartruhari is required to play his role very
precisely. He will shout, he will renounce, he will cry, he will
make all the gestures that will convince the audience of his
sorrow. After the play if we ask him, ‘were you very sad and
hurting you a lot?’ He will tell you, ‘No! I am Laxmichand. I
was simply playing the role of King Bhartruhari.’ That is exactly

Aptavani-9

137

how you will have to play the role of ‘Chandulal’ in your worldly
interactions. Your work is done when you realize the answer to,
‘Who am I?’
Suspicion-free about ‘I am Chandulal’ for
countless past lives
No one has really any suspicions or doubts regarding the
issue of, ‘Who am I?’ Even the greatest of ascetics and spiritual
masters have never had suspicions over their identity with their
name. If suspicions were to arise then we can know that they
are approaching samyak darshan - the right vision. However,
that suspicion does not arise in the first place! On the contrary,
they strengthen their ignorance of their identity and because of
that, anger-pride-attachment-greed remain intact. One has held
on to the non-truth, this has caused an awareness of this nontruth to be the truth. If one hangs on to the non-truth for a long
period of time, that non-truth becomes the truth for him. If the
non-truth becomes deeply engrained in his belief, it becomes the
truth and then he will never come to the realization that it is the
non-truth; it will always be the truth for him.
Hence anger-pride-attachment-greed will go away if
suspicions about one’s true identity arises, but such suspicions
never do. How would they? Who would help you in doing so?
Man has been suspicion-free about his real identity for endless
past lives, who can create suspicion in this matter? Whatever
name one has been given in any life, he assumed it to be the
truth. Suspicion has never arisen about it, has it? How
tremendously difficult this is? And anger-pride-attachment-greed
remains intact because of that. You do not need anger-prideattachment-greed if you are the pure Soul and if you are
Chandulal, then you need them. The ‘solution’ of all the
scriptures comes from knowing only this – the knowledge of the
Self. But how can one attain the knowledge of the Self? After
attaining the knowledge of the Self, nothing more remains to be
known, but how is one to know this?

138

Aptavani-9

Suspicion-free in regards to the Soul
The Lord has said that one cannot become suspicion free
regarding the Self. This had indeed happened for Lord Krishna.
Otherwise, suspicion over what the Soul must be like will always
remain: ‘Is the Soul like this? What must the Soul be like? Surely
there must be some doer-ship in the Soul?’ Uncertainties such
as these are bound to remain. Otherwise people will claim,
‘How can everything function without doer-ship?’ Alas only
the Gnani Purush can know how everything works. The Gnani
has come to know the Soul (the Self). The Gnani knows and
experiences the Self and it is not the kind that is described in
the scriptures. Nothing related to the Self is to be found in
books.
No one has become suspicion free in matters of the Self.
People claim, ‘Surely the soul must have at least this much intent
(bhavna)? Now the soul that people believe to be the Soul is
the soul I call nischetan-chetan (‘lifeless life’ or the ‘charged
soul’ or ‘charged consciousness’). So how can anyone attain the
Soul based on these beliefs? Suspicion is bound to remain here.
The whole world has suspicion in matters of the Soul.
People tell me, ‘the soul is doing anger-pride-attachment-greed’
I respond, ‘So then we don’t have to worry about anything. The
matter is over!’ They go on to justify, ‘because matter which is
inanimate (jada) can never do anything.’ I tell them, ‘Yes, the
inanimate cannot do anything but, how can the Soul? When the
energy or the power to ‘do’ is not an inherent property of an
entity, how can that entity do anything?’ In fact, people do not
have knowledge of the vyatirek (tertiary) property that arises
when jada matter (inanimate) and chetan (Soul) the animate,
come in close proximity with each other. They do not know that
when these two elements come together, a third property arises
spontaneously. Neither the Soul nor the matter loses its intrinsic
(anvaya) property but a new, a third property (vyatirek) arises.
However, only the Gnani can make one understand this.

Aptavani-9

139

One cannot waste this precious human life
this way
When a person starts thinking, ‘I wonder what the Soul
is like? Is it like this or like that?’ the Lord called this state
samyaktva mohaniya (delusional state of identity with ego
which has understood the separate existence of the Real Self
and strives to achieve that state; fascination of the real). People
have not even come close to such an inquiry. This question has
not even arisen. Currently everyone is in mithyatva mohaniya
(delusional state of residing in, and identifying with, and
existence as the ego) and mishra mohaniya (delusional state of
existence which is a mixture of alternating state between
samyaktva and mithyatva), both the states are that of being
deluded by the illusion that this world is real. A man in whom
samyaktva mohaniya arises, the Lord would call him a great
soul. But here man considers himself something great if he has
a house and some land; he considers himself so fortunate that he
rubs his belly with contentment, belches with satisfaction and
falls asleep.
Hey you foolish one! How can you sleep? You have
slept for countless past lives in this way, rubbing your belly. Are
you not ashamed? You rub your big belly this way and belch
with contentment. How can you fall asleep? Is this world for
sleeping away your life like this? How can you sleep when you
have attained this precious human life? You have attained a
human life form, you have all the conveniences, you have
conveniences of reading all the great scriptures, you have
attained a high level of devotion (bhakti), you have had
darshan of the vitarag Lords in derasars and you go off to sleep
feeling content like this?
And now people have created ‘bedrooms’. You foolish
ones, you cannot have bedrooms. Everyone should sleep
together in one room. Bedrooms create worldly troubles!
Bedrooms have caused people to become preoccupied with

140

Aptavani-9

that which perpetuate worldly troubles whole nightlong. So how
can they even think about the Self? Can one have thoughts
about the Self in his private bedroom?
I asked one person, ‘What is your meditation (dhyan)
before you go to sleep?’ He replied, ‘It is ten thirty now so
should I not go to sleep?’ Hey you!! You are going to sleep
without earning anything? ‘Tell me what you earned today?’ I
asked him and he replied, ‘At least I do something, she does not
do anything.’ I asked her and she proceeded to tell me, ‘He
does not do anything either.’ This is how people talk.
Questioner: Yes, that is how people look at things rather
than looking at themselves.
Dadashri: All this is nothing but deceit!
The entire world lives in suspicion without exception.
Their suspicions never ventures into ‘what is the Soul?’ They
have uncertainties about, ‘I wonder if the Soul is like this? Or
maybe it is like that?’ Uncertainty always remains and that gives
rise to all kinds of suspicions and more suspicions.
That is when suspicions and uncertainties go
away
Questioner: I am not saying that I have become free
from suspicions, but suspicion does not arise within.
Dadashri: Yes, they may not arise, that is a different
matter. You will feel that way for a certain period of time. Then
when difficulties come, suspicions will arise again. Does anything
ever remain the same? Just as day and night keep changing, time
keeps changing, circumstances will constantly change.
Therefore when will man’s suspicions leave? They will
leave when he becomes vitarag (free from all attachments) and
nirbhay (fearless). Otherwise, suspicions will not leave. As long
as there is peace, it will appear to be comforting and easy.
When external problems arise, turmoil and restlessness begins.

Aptavani-9

141

Then inner entanglements commence and these give rise to all
kinds of suspicions.
Who has suspicion about the Atma?
Questioner: Shrimad Rajchandraji has written in the
Atma siddhi:
‘Atma ni shanka kare Atma potey aap,
Shanka no karnaar tey, acharaj eh amaap.’
The existence of the soul is suspected by the soul itself,
This is verily a matter of immeasurable amazement.
Who has suspicions about the Soul, is it the soul or is it
the (buddhi) intellect?
Dadashri: Suspicions about the Soul are done by the
soul itself; the intellect is not the one doing the suspecting. By the
soul, ‘we’ mean the soul that is in your belief or projection and
not the main Soul; the two are completely separate. What you
call the atma (soul), is the atma that is associated with the
intellect and the ego. The ego, the intellect etc., collectively begin
to have suspicions about the main Soul. What kind of suspicions
do they have? ‘It does not seem like the main Soul. It does not
feel like that.’ They have suspicions and uncertainties about what
the Soul must be like.
Questioner: So besides the intellect, the atma is there
too, is it associated with the intellect?
Dadashri: What do you or the world currently believe
the soul to be? One believes ‘I am Chandulal. The intellect is
mine. The ego is mine. I myself am the soul and I have to make
the soul pure.’ That is what one believes. He does not realize
that the main Soul is pure (shuddha) indeed and all other things
that have a form are things that have been created. Therefore,
the ego is in all this, the intellect is there too and that is what
creates suspicions. The intellect (buddhi) alone does not create

142

Aptavani-9

suspicions; the intellect along with the ego creates suspicions.
That is the one who does the suspecting.
“The existence of the Soul is suspected by the soul (i.e.
the charged soul with ego and intellect) itself.”
One is the soul and he has suspicions about his own self.
So besides ‘him’, who else would have suspicion? Neither the
complex of anger-pride-attachment-greed nor the mind or the
intellect does the suspecting. It is the soul (non-Self realized) that
has suspicions about the Soul. It is a wonder it says. It suspects
its own self. The ignorance in one has pervaded to such an
extent that he begins to suspect his own existence: ‘do I or do
I not exist?’ That is what he is trying to say. This is a beautiful
quote from Krupadudev but only if one understands it.
Questioner: Is it the work of the pratishthit atma (the
relative or the charged atma, the relative-self, ‘I am Chandulal’)
to have suspicions?
Dadashri: The main Atma, the Self does not have
suspicion. But the pratishthit atma is definitely laden with
suspicions (shankashil). Depending on the kind of pratishtha
(projections of one’s inner intent) you do of a murti (idol; your
body; the one with a form), the fruits you reap from your
pratishtha will be matching. Similarly, you have also done
pratishtha in this murti (your body). There is no difference
between this idol and that idol. Whatever pratishtha you have
done in this body; whatever projections of belief you have
instilled in this body is what you will receive. Good pratishtha
will give you good fruits.
Questioner: So it is the pratishthit atma that has
suspicion about the shuddha atma (pure atma; the main Soul)?
Dadashri: Yes, the pratishthit atma. I have referred to
it as ‘pratishthit atma’ but people call it ‘vyavahar atma’ (the
worldly soul). What you currently believe as the atma is really

Aptavani-9

143

the vyavahar atma – the relative self. But people do not
understand what goes on within the relative self. You have no
understanding about the vyavahar atma; the creator of another
(new) pratishthit atma is ‘you’ yourself. Because you do
pratishtha, it gives rise to the pratishthit atma. By having the
belief of ‘I am Chandulal’ and being Chandulal, your (new)
pratishthit atma arises again; another pratishtha is being
formed within. Because you believe in the one with a form, you
are doing pratishtha in the form and that is why the one with
a form will be born. With the belief ‘I am a pure Soul’ everything
will fall away.

Pragnya (the direct light of the Self) is
biased only towards the Self
Questioner: Does not the intellect (buddhi) also say, ‘I
am Shuddhatma (pure Soul) and not the body?’
Dadashri: Here it is not the buddhi that says so. The
buddhi will not allow you to say, ‘I am Shuddhatma.’ It is selfdestruction for the intellect to say so. It will lose its own
existence. Therefore the intellect will never side with the
Shuddhatma. If it says, ‘I am Shuddhatma,’ then the mind, body,
chit and ego will lose their existence; so even the mind will not
accept this. They understand it but they will not accept it. The
intellect will always side with the worldly life and the worldly
soul; it will never side with the pure Soul. It will always oppose
the pure Soul. Now there is an energy within you called
‘pragnya shakti’; it has become separated from the Self. As
long as it is involved in the worldly life, the Self does not have
to do anything. This energy of the Self, called pragnya shakti,
does the ‘work’ on behalf of the Self. What is its function? Day
and night, it will keep guiding the relative-self towards the Self.
The whole day it is constantly working to take the self towards
the Self. And the energy called agnya shakti (ignorance of the
Self) which is what we call buddhi (intellect), works day and
night to take the relative self towards the worldly life. There is

144

Aptavani-9

a constant and an on going tug of war within, between the two.
Agnya is the intellect (buddhi) and pragnya is the main thing,
the real thing. Pragnya always cautions and alerts You, the
awakened Self inside and it is always trying to take You towards
moksha. This pragnya shakti has arisen within You. The
spiritual level of pragnya shakti in Akram Vignan is much higher
than the level of sthita pragnya. In the state of sthita pragnya
one is an expert of the worldly interaction and will not criticize
anyone. He will consider himself to be the state of sthita
pragnya because his intellect has become still. But this pragnya
shakti is the energy that will take You to moksha, whereas the
one who has sthita pragnya will need to find a path further
ahead to go to moksha.
When suspicions about the Soul goes away completely,
then know that you have attained moksha. When one is
convinced, ‘This verily is the Self’, then the work is attained.

Nihshankta (suspicion-less-ness): Nirbhayta
(fear-less-ness): Asangata (a state of being
free from all association): Moksha
Wherever there is suspicion, there is misery. And ‘I am
pure Soul’, is the state of suspicion-less-ness (nihshankta).
Nihshankta is moksha. One’s spiritual work will be done only
when one becomes without any suspicion whatsoever. So you
can ask anything you want here. This Gnani Purush is here to
get rid of all your suspicions. The Gnani can make you
nihshank when all kinds of suspicions arise. Suspicion-less
state gives rise to fearlessness (nirbhayta). Fearlessness then
leads to the state of being asang. The one who is asang is not
associated whatsoever with any activities of thoughts speech
or actions, even as they are being carried out. Asangata verily
is moksha.
What has Krupadudev said?
‘Suspicion less state (nihshankta) gives rise to fearlessness

Aptavani-9

145

(nirbhayta) and because of that one attains the state without
any association (nisangata).’
Now the suspicion referred to here is different from
worldly suspicion. It means suspicion that occurs starting point
of gnan, the pursuit of spiritual knowledge, the entry into path of
liberation to the final liberation. All this suspicion is regarding the
Self. Up to what point is it considered suspicion? To the point
where one no longer has suspicions about the Self; to the point
where there are no suspicions or uncertainties about what the
Soul is and what it may not be. Until then one will not attain the
state devoid of suspicions (nihshankta). When one attains the
state free of suspicions, then no energy in this world can create
fear. Absolute fearlessness is nirbhayta. And when one attains
the state of fearlessness, then despite all company and
associations, he is nisang - meaning he is aloof, without
association (independent). Despite grave and threatening
associations and connections, there prevails a state of absolute
freedom and that is moksha. That is what Krupadudev is saying.
There is not a single person in this world that has become
completely free from suspicions about the Soul. Had anyone
attained this state, he would have found liberation and he would
have helped another five people or more achieve the same. But
instead people are wandering aimlessly and so is he.
This is what happens in the Gnan Vidhi
Otherwise, man has not become suspicion-free in any of
his past lives, and especially in matters of the Soul, no one has
become suspicion-free (nihshankta). It is not easy to be
suspicion-free about the Soul.
This Gnan makes you suspicion-free (nihshank). How
does it happen? When the component of mind-intellect-chit-ego
(antahkaran), the sense organs (gnanendriyas), organs of
action (karmendriyas) all become unanimously accepting
(ekmata) that is when one becomes suspicion-free (nihshank).

146

Aptavani-9

When everything of the body becomes unified in agreement
(ekmata), when the Gnan that is spoken by ‘Dada’ becomes
one voice, all accept it, then one becomes suspicion-free
(nihshank).
You no longer have suspicions within, do you? Otherwise,
one cannot go even one hour without having suspicions; there is
such a ‘big crowd’ within. There is no knowledge which all (the
aforementioned components of the antahkaran, gnanendriyas
etc.) within will accept. Either the mind will ‘shout and
complain’, or the chit will ‘shout’. One entity or other within will
be upset and find faults. Therefore, they are such that they will
not become unanimous. There is a densely ‘packed’ ‘community’
within. Even if one entity within questions, ‘What if this
happens?’ it will give rise to suspicion. And for You (the one
who has taken the Gnan in the Gnan Vidhi), there is no uprising
within anymore, is there? They are all united and present, are
they not? So it is only when everything within is uniformly
unanimous, that one becomes suspicion-free.
Never before have all entities within the body become
unanimous and uniformly united. It is a different thing when one
becomes focused in a deluded state (moorchha) in worldly
matters. This worldly state is like the state of one intoxicated
with alcohol. Once you give them some ‘alcohol’, all within fall
under the spell of worldly fun (masti); whereas this Gnan is
without such moorchha (delusion). This Gnan is such that even
if one is intoxicated with a little delusion, it will bring it down.
So wherever you go, everyone has suspicions about the
Soul and because of that they remain here caught up in the
worldly life. They do not become suspicion-free and they do not
achieve anything. Without a Gnani Purush, not a single person
has ever become suspicion-free, in matters of the Self. People
are looking for knowledge that removes all suspicion, it is not to
be found anywhere in anyone. It is not to be found even in the
Kramic path. It is only possible here because of Akram Vignan.

Aptavani-9

147

One can only get his work done if the suspicion, regarding the
Self, leaves.
Here one attains the Self in an hour and therefore
becomes suspicion-free (nihshank). This is no ordinary state of
worldly ease and splendor. This is the luxury and the splendor
of Akram Vignan but human beings do not understand it.
Otherwise one can never become suspicion-free regarding the
Soul, even in a million life times and one can never attain the
Self.
One cannot get rid of suspicions about the Soul without
a Gnani Purush and one’s suspicions in the worldly life will never
go away until he becomes suspicion-free about the Soul. When
one becomes suspicion-free about the Soul, all other suspicions
become exposed and are seen as they are. Here in Akram
Vignan, no suspicions about the Soul remain at all.
The Science of Separation through Akram
You should not have any suspicions anywhere. In this
world, there is no misery like suspicion. I have given you the
suspicion-free Self. That Self is such that suspicion will never
arise. So all suspicions of, ‘is it like this?’ or ‘is it like that?’; are
gone. This is Akram Vignan and therefore the pure Soul has
been attained.
There are two parts in this body. One is the Self, which
is Your own ‘home’ and the other is the non-Self, which is
‘foreign’ to You. As long as one does not have knowledge of
these two parts, one keeps saying, ‘I am Chandulal’.
The Gnan ‘we’ give you here is Akram Vignan. What is
Akram Vignan? In it, the Self and the non-Self are exposed as
they are and they become separate. The Self sits in the place of
the Self (swakshetra) and the non-Self is the parkshetra the
‘foreign’ location. This separation occurs in the Gnan Vidhi.
Therefore, a line of demarcation falls between the Self and the
non-Self, and then everything falls in its regular course.

148

Aptavani-9

And the soul (atma) that is out there is an adulterated soul.
Its worth is the same as adulterated goods you get for eight
pennies in the market. It is a tasteless mixture, whereas you can
‘taste’ this One (Self) here, immediately. One’s freedom has
expressed. Now only the ‘files’ (the pending karmic effects)
need to be settled with equanimity. Until then there will be an
‘interim government’ and when all the files have been settled
with equanimity, the ‘full government’ will arrive.
Then there is no liability
Do you now have suspicion about the knowledge of ‘I am
Chandulal’ or do you not have any such suspicions?
Questioner: That specific suspicion has arisen. So now
I am the Self and Chandulal is the non-Self, under the influence
of other forces (parsatta). He is the neighbor.
Dadashri: Yes, Chandulal is the neighbor. Suppose there
are two brothers jointly own a piece of land. Both have to share
losses that incur from that property. Later, when the land is
divided between the two, each will own the property separately.
So then, one brother is not responsible for the other brother’s
portion and his liability. That is how a division is made between
the ‘Self’ and the ‘non-Self’. ‘We’ have put an exact line of
demarcation between the two. This is the science, the Akram
Vignan that has arisen in this time cycle and so You have to take
advantage of it.
With the line of demarcation placed between the Self and
the non-Self, Your relation with Chandulal now is that of a
neighbor. You are not responsible for any wrong doings of the
neighbor. There is no ownership of the non-Self, so You are not
guilty. Only the owner is guilty. Once the ownership leaves, there
is no guilt or liability.
If we ask someone, ‘Why do you look down when you
walk?’ he will reply, ‘If I don’t then I will accidentally walk over
the insects’ So ‘we’ ask him, ‘Why? Are these legs yours?’ and

Aptavani-9

149

he will say, ‘Of course they are mine!’ Will he not say that?
Therefore, if the legs belong to you, then you are responsible for
all the insects that get crushed beneath them. After Gnan, the
awareness of, ‘This body is not mine,’ (I am not the body)
remains for You. Therefore, You have to let go of the ownership
of the body. ‘We’ take away the ownership when ‘we’ give you
the Gnan. Now, if you take back that ownership, it will be your
responsibility. Otherwise, everything will remain exact. This
Vignan is such that it will keep You in a state similar to that of
Lord Mahavir!
Therefore, You should not interfere with whatever this
external part, is doing. Then, You are not responsible at all. And,
You are not able to do anything at all. The belief ‘I can do
something’ is verily the wrong understanding. This belief ruins
the next life.
When dust is flying all around, one cannot see clearly
what is on the other side. Similarly, the entanglements of karmas
prevent you from seeing clearly and thus you get confused. But
those entanglements will go away if there is the awareness of ‘I
am Shuddhatma’. That is why ‘we’ have given you the five
sentences (Five Agnas) so that you can remain in the same state
as that of Lord Mahavir.
The path to moksha is straight (sarad), easy (sahelo) and
natural (sahaj); but its attainment is very difficult. It is very rare
to come into contact with a Gnani Purush and if and when you
do, it is very difficult to attain Gnan from him. Some people have
been trying for several years to attain this Gnan without success.
Then, there are those who attain it within an hour! Everyone’s
circumstances are different are they not?
Suspicion does not depart through reading
books
Questioner: But Dada, actions occur through human
beings. It is only when God manifests in a human being that one

150

Aptavani-9

becomes free of suspicions. The final suspicion would not go
away simply from reading books, would it?
Dadashri: There is nothing in the books and you will not
get anything out of them in this regard. Can you taste sweetness
by merely reading the sentence, ‘Sugar is sweet,’ in a book?
What good does it do for you? Would the experience of
sweetness not come only when you put sugar in your mouth?
Questioner: So one cannot find a human being in whom
God has manifested and the scriptures do not work. Does that
mean that one has to wander around life after life?
Dadashri: Yes, one has to wander, that is all.
Questioner: From one shop to another, and from that
one to another.
Dadashri: Yes, one has to wander around, shop after
shop.
Questioner: And the more shops we wander, the more
the stock that is filled from other shops.
Dadashri: Yes, that increases. And suspicions like, ‘Will
I get it from here or will I get it from there?’ keep on increasing.
Only when one finds the ultimate shop, will he find the solution.
In that shop, all suspicions about everything will depart.
Knowing causes suspicion
When does suspicion arise? If a person reads too much,
it creates projections of intellect, which leads to entanglements
and confusion. That confusion leads to suspicions and they will
not let him come out of the worldly life. Suspicions arise from
the familiarity of reading scriptures for many life times. Therefore
the more one reads, the more it troubles him. This kind of
knowing, the Lord has referred to as ‘overwiseness’.
If you are a lawyer, then the overwiseness of being a
lawyer will bother you. If your wife buys sugar in the black

Aptavani-9

151

market, even then your mind you will say, ‘Don’t do that…don’t
do that.’ So if a lawyer wants to do anything, suspicions will first
arise in him saying, ‘If I do that, such and such a law will apply
to me,’ and so he will miss the target and he will end up
somewhere else.
Such is the evident problem of the excessive knowledge
that you have attained. That is why it continues to push and prod
you. One continues to suffer because of this ‘knowing’. That is
why ‘we’ say to you to say, ‘I do not know anything.’ Destroy
all the ‘goods’ within you by doing this. They are like chewed
pieces of sugarcane which have been discarded. It has not
helped you at all. You simply believe it has, but it has not been
of any help at all. Your worries have not decreased, your ego
has not gone down and neither have your anger-pride-deceitgreed. So just get rid of all the ‘quarrelsome goods’ within you
that have accumulated from your countless past lives. That is
why ‘we’ tell you to keep the intent (bhaav) of, ‘I do not know
anything.’ All the knowledge you have makes you suffer; it has
not reduced your kashayas of anger-pride-deceit-pride, has it?
So, that means that you have not really known anything. If you
had, then your kashayas would not be so evident to others.
Nevertheless, even in the situation where your kashayas are not
evident on the outside, you do not achieve anything because you
never know when the not-so-evident kashayas, will erupt
again. You keep feeding them through your intellect but that
has led you to suffer in countless past lives. That is why, you
will find a solution if you have the inner intent of, ‘I do not
know anything.’
One seeker had read many scriptures. When he came to
receive this Gnan, I told him, ‘Can you show me the clay
container that holds your doodhpaak (a delicacy of sweet
milk)?’ When he showed me what he had, I told to him, ‘If you
take this to a vendor who sells hot peppers and you ask him if
it was okay for you to put his hot peppers in it, he will tell you,

152

Aptavani-9

you can put a little in it, because he wants to sell his goods to
you. Then if you go to the salt merchant and ask him the same,
he will tell you that you can. If you go and ask any vendors, they
will tell you it is okay for you to add whatever they are selling
to your sweet dish. In this way, your precious sweet dish will
become ruined; it will ruin the taste in your mouth.
That is why ‘we’ make you throw away the sweet dish
along with the container. We do not want even the smell of it.
So, everything that you have known so far is wrong. What is the
point of knowing something that did not help you, it did not
destroy your anger-pride-deceit-greed and it did not help you
attain the Self? And after attaining the knowledge of the Self,
there is no need to know anything more. If someone feels that
he has attained the Self from what he knows, then there is no
need for him to know this Akram Vignan. This is the science of
Akram Vignan and the other is the Kramic path. So if a person
feels he has attained the Self, then there is no need for him to
mix the two. He will not gain anything from mixing the two. He
has to continue taking the medicine he normally takes. On the
contrary, he may create some other problems by mixing the two
medicines. So why would you want to mix the two? Krupadudev
has said to follow the path that removes impurities within.
Because all we want to see and need is to remove the impurities,
what else do we need?
So this worldly life does not let go of those who have
suspicions. This world will not let go of anyone who has the
slightest of doubt, delusion, or suspicion. That is exactly why
one remains bound to the worldly life. Your work will not be
accomplished successfully if suspicions arise. Instead uneducated
people are better off. These so-called experts of scriptures are
all engrossed in their suspicions. Suspicion has not arisen for our
mahatmas who have attained Gnan. Suspicion will arise if you
have read a lot, will it not? For the one who becomes suspicionfree, his Self is there with eternal bliss.

Aptavani-9

153

This world is trapped because of suspicions. Very rarely
will the mahatma who has taken Gnan, have suspicion even for
a fraction of a second about the Self. This has not happened; it
has never been heard of to occur. Here ‘we’ have not heard of
anything like suspicion.
Questioner: Those who have not heard of the Self
before would not have any suspicions but those who have heard
of Atma repeatedly, will wonder, which is true, this or that?
Dadashri: What is the reason when a person does not
have suspicion about the Self after having heard about it? After
attaining this Gnan, one attains the experience that he indeed is
the Self, and this experience never leaves; it is present even
when he wakes up at two in the morning. Such a phenomenon
as this, where the Self presents automatically, can never occur
anywhere in the world. This is what we call the experience
(anubhav). Attaining the Self is considered the experience.
The awareness (laksha) of the Self is considered the
experience (anubhav) because the Self is present even before
he wakes up.
So, the one whose suspicion is gone has attained the
absolute Self. Otherwise, no one’s suspicions of, ‘What is the
Soul like?’ are likely to go away. The suspicion and uncertainty
of ‘there is Atma’ may go away on occasion, but not the
suspicion over ‘What is the Atma like?’ This is deeply
entrenched.
Turmoil and anguish will occur wherever there is
suspicion. When there is no suspicion, not even for a fraction
of a second; that is where the Self is. Then there is no
suspicion left.
After Gnan, there is no one left to suspect
Once suspicions depart, everything falls into place.
However, the fact you are rid of your suspicion is dependant

154

Aptavani-9

upon your karmic account, is it not? Just because someone else
has been able to get rid of it, does that mean that you too will
be able to do so? Not everyone has the same suspicions. So
You have to ask within, ‘What are you suspicious about? What
kinds of suspicions remain?’ One may reply, ‘No, I do not have
any suspicions left any more.’ Those who do will remain here for
a while and by asking me questions, their suspicions will go
away and their problems will be solved.
Questioner: When you ask me who I am, I have
suspicions about saying, ‘I am Shuddhatma.’
Dadashri: The one who has this suspicion ‘I am
Shuddhatma’ is verily the Shuddhatma. So ‘You’ are not sitting
in the right seat. Take the correct seat, that seat will let You see
who is having the suspicion.
Gnan shows its presence, where such a
suspicion arises
Now, after attaining this Gnan when you do something
and have a suspicion of ‘will I be bound by my mistake?’ at this
time because of the presence of the Self, that suspicion will fade
away. Otherwise, who would have such suspicions? Do people
of this world have such suspicions? Why not? It is because the
Self is not present there.
So who experiences suspicions over doer-ship, over the
belief, ‘I am the doer’? Whenever you have such a suspicion,
know that the Self is present there and that is why that suspicion
fades away.
Questioner: As long as the light of Gnan is burning that
is when suspicions arise. How can there be suspicion when there
is no such light?
Dadashri: Yes. You can see insects being crushed by a
car only if the car’s headlights are on but what if there is no
light? There will be no suspicion at all.

Aptavani-9

155

You do not become tanmayakar i.e. you do not become
engrossed or become one with your relative self because of the
Gnan ‘we’ have given you. But You may feel and wonder, ‘Did
I become tanmayakar?’ But no You do not, it is merely a
suspicion. The Lord says the fact that you have suspicion means
you are in Gnan, because others (people without Gnan) will not
have such suspicions as to whether they become tanmayakar
(become one with the self). In fact they are always tanmayakar.
You have this Gnan and so you will have the suspicions of,
‘Did I become tanmayakar or not?’ and that is the suspicion!
Still the Lord says, ‘I forgive You for that suspicion.’ One may
ask, ‘Lord! Why are you so forgiving?’ He will tell you, ‘You
did not become tanmayakar; there is a misunderstanding on
your part.’
You do not become tanmayakar; it is merely your
suspicion. Why do others not have such suspicions? Do other
people have suspicions like that? No. they have never even had
a thought of ‘I am separate and free’. Therefore, You are
definitely separate. The Lord even pardons your suspicions of,
‘Did I become tanmayakar or not?’ But the Lord also says that
even such suspicion should not arise with gradual practice.
Suspicion-free as to the purity of the Self
In reality the Soul is like the space, and ‘Shuddhatma’ is
a sangnya (an understanding through association), a symbol or
a sign of sort. What is that sangnya?
Questioner: In order to understand the soul.
Dadashri: No. No matter what kind of deeds, good or
bad, are done by this body, You are pure (shuddha). One may
say, ‘Dear Lord, I am pure but what about this body that does
negative things?’ The Lord still says, ‘Those deeds are not
Yours. You are pure (shuddha) but if You believe those deeds
to be yours, then you are bound by them.’ That is why the word
Shuddhatma is written as a symbol association (sangnya).

156

Aptavani-9

And why do ‘we’ call it the pure Soul (Shuddhatma)? It
is because it is not affected by any impurities (ashuddhatma),
despite going through the entire worldly life. But the belief ‘I am
Shuddhatma (I am a pure Soul)’ does not become established,
does it? ‘How can I be pure? I do so many bad deeds, I do
this and I do that, etc.’ So the belief ‘I am pure’ does not
become established, and the suspicion, ‘How can you say ‘I am
a pure Soul’?’ continues.
After attaining this Gnan, You have an established
awareness (laksha) of ‘I am a pure Soul’. Therefore, regardless
of whether you do good deeds or bad deeds, You are not the
doer of those deeds. You are pure. You will not become tainted
by the good deeds or the bad deeds and therefore you are verily
pure (shuddha). ‘We’ tell You that nothing is going to touch
You, when ‘we’ give you Gnan. You will progress once You
become suspicion-free (nihshank) about this. If you become
suspicious, then you will be bound by it but if you do not
become suspicious, then You are free. It will not affect You if
you remain in Dada’s Agnas.
The main fact is that it is not worth having any suspicion.
Really, You are not doing anything. You are not doing any such
actions. It is merely a delusion; it is a twisted perception.
Therefore, the word ‘Shuddhatma’ is the sangnya (a symbol) to
understand that the Soul is pure, has been pure and it always will
be pure. So it becomes unshakably established if You remain in
that understanding. After that the Self attains the Absolute state,
full enlightenment as the Self, called kevalgnan.
The original Self is the absolute Self (kevalgnan swaroop).
So then, what is the difference between You and ‘us’? ‘We’
remain as ‘kevalgnan swaroop’ as the absolute Self and You,
the mahatmas remain as Shuddhatma (the pure Self). The
suspicions You have about the original Self are gone, so all other
suspicions have gone away. Still some, who by their old ways

Aptavani-9

157

and nature are prone to use excessive intellect, will continue to
have suspicions about this.
Where is the basis for suspicion?
Questioner: Now through your grace, finally we feel and
are convinced that no suspicions remain.
Dadashri: Yes, no suspicions can remain here. And this
world is not worth having any suspicions over. I would not tell
you not to have suspicions in my absence if there were any merit
in it. On the contrary, I have told you to eat, drink and be merry
and I have also told you not to have suspicions because I have
seen the suspicion-free world. That is why I am telling you. I
have seen a suspicion-free world on the one side and a world
with suspicions on the other. Once I show you the direction of
the suspicion-free world, there will be no problem.
Can You function without suspicion?
Questioner: We can function very well! But that should
(suspicion-free state) occur, should it not?
Dadashri: That will happen. People of India have been
destroyed by doubts, suspicion and fear. So I am trying to get
rid of the word suspicion from this world. That word is worth
getting rid of. There is no ghost worse than that in the world.
That is why many people are in misery: misery caused by
suspicion.
Why do they have doubts (vahem)? It is not worth having
doubts (vahem) of any kind. It is not a problem that helps; it is
harmful. It makes worse, whatever bad situation that already
exists. And whatever damage is going to occur – there will not
be any problems in that. So let go of any doubts. That is what
I have been telling you all along and I have helped many get rid
of it.
Now all this Gnan is based on my own experiences. I am

158

Aptavani-9

giving you my own experiences and they are appropriate. They
are experiences of my awareness (jagruti) which prevails every
second; they are not just of this life but also of countless past
lives. What is more, they are original. There is no problem if you
do not find this knowledge in any scripture but it is original,
coming out for the first time in this world.
Dealings are of the pudgal (the relative-Self)
and the Self is vitarag
Questioner: I have read in the scriptures about the
vitarag (the detached One) and the description about their state
of being vitarag, but I have never seen a living vitarag.
Dadashri: You will not find one. You will not be able to
do darshan of a vitarag. I failed in this time cycle and that is
why I am still wandering. However, that is also why all of you
are able to do the darshan. Otherwise, you will not even get to
do darshan of the one who is very close to the Absolute state
of full enlightenment (kevalgnan)! It is because you are able to
do the darshan of the vitarag that you can understand vitarag.
That is how ‘we’ remain.
See, do ‘we’ have any differences of opinion (matbhed)
or problems with anyone even when they say negative things?
‘We’ know how to deal with such people. ‘We’ know how to
remain ‘vitarag’ (detached) and deal with them at the same time.
The pudgal, the non-Self complex, does the dealing and ‘we’
remain vitarag. So people have a chance to see a vitarag in this
time cycle; that is if they understand this. You will be able to see
pure vitarag if You delve deeper. ‘We’ never keep a mental note
of any events that transpire. Once an incident takes place, it is
over; ‘we’ never keep a mental note of it. ‘We’ got rid of our
‘notebook’ a long time ago.
Questioner: You do not make note of any compliments
or praises given, or being showered with flower garlands or
someone hurling insults or stones at You!

Aptavani-9

159

Dadashri: Yes otherwise, the notebook will eventually fill
up resulting in negativity and then it will change the inner vision
(drashti) towards the other person. When the other person sees
you, he will be able to sense it in the way you look at him. Will
the other person not know about the note you have made
about him? He will immediately know that you have made a
note of something he said to you a while ago. These people may
not know how to see anything else but they do know how to
look in your eyes about the notes you make. But in ‘our’ eyes
they see vitaragata (the detached state) and immediately realize
that Dada is the same as he was. They see vitaragata in ‘our’
eyes. Just as you can recognize a man’s immoral intent from his
eyes or recognize a greedy person from his eyes, similarly you
can recognize a vitarag from his eyes. When there is no
agitation, fidgety sign in the eyes it means that nothing has been
noted within.
Where there is love, there is no nondha
(intense mental note)
The love that arises should be such that it neither increases
nor decreases; you need that kind of love. Real love is love that
will not decrease for the person who insults you or curses you.
The love that increases or decreases is really an infatuation
(aasakti). If any love begins to increase or decrease, then it
becomes an infatuation (aasakti). In health too, when health
goes up or down, it is referred to as disease. When the son
comes home from earning good money, he is praised, ‘Hey son,
you did a great job!’ and when he loses money a few years
later, the father will say, ‘He is crazy. I have told him so many
times that I am tired of telling him. It has given me a
headache!’ This is aasakti! Instead, the opinion that we have
in ‘our college (Akram Vignan)’ is preferable. It remains with
us, forever the same.
Questioner: It is the same between a husband and a

160

Aptavani-9

wife. They say, ‘I love you. I need you’ and then they fight.
Dadashri: That is aasakti. There is no telling where it is
and where it will end up. Oho ho! The great lovers! A man with
true love will not let go of her until she dies. There cannot be
deep mental notes (nondha) where there is love. It is not
possible to have both love and a ‘mental notebook’. When you
make a note of, ‘You did this…You did that’, there is no love
there any more.
‘We’ have so many mahatmas here but ‘we’ do not
make a note of anybody, even when they do distressful things.
There is neither an external note nor an internal one. If an inner
mental note (nondha) is made then, tension will arise even
when there is no cause for it. You will see ‘us’ tension free, no
matter when you see ‘us’, day or night. And that is why there
is no hassle anywhere. Even when ‘our’ health is not good
they all say, ‘Dada is smiling.’ There is a smile because there
is no tension! So do not get involved with anyone’s affairs.
Tension will arise even if you become concerned about your
physical health, ‘I have this problem and that problem’, will it
not?
Questioner: ‘Where there is love there is no nondha
(intense mental note),’ this is an important statement.
Dadashri: Yes, love that keeps mental notes is not love.
The love of this world is one which has mental notes. A
woman will make a note of, ‘He said this to me today.’ Now
how can you call that love? There is no need to make any
notes if it is love, otherwise it will become infatuation
(attraction-repulsion). Love that increases or decreases is not
love. The world will not refrain from making notes. They may
not tell you on your face but in their mind they will say, ‘he told
me off a few days ago.’ Would she not keep that on her mind?
Therefore, does she not keep a note? The one who does not
keep notes has real love. I do not have a notebook, how can

Aptavani-9

161

there even be such a book? There can be a notebook only if
you make a mental note. Now you must throw away your
mental notes. They are not worth keeping. Give away your
notebook to some other businessman. It is not something
worth keeping.
Questioner: When someone makes an intense mental
note, ‘You said this to me and you said that’, then that love is
broken.
Dadashri: Yes, but one cannot refrain from making an
intense mental note. Would even the wife not do that? Will your
wife not be doing that?
Questioner: Dada everyone does it, but can we not
erase it through Gnan and pratikraman?
Dadashri: No matter how much you try to erase it, you
will not succeed. Once you make an intense mental note
(nondha), you cannot get rid of it by attempting to erase it. The
intense mental note will weaken a little but one cannot refrain
from making a comment, can one? Whatever this gentleman
here may do, or whatever changes may occur in you, ‘we’ will
not make any note. Therefore, there is no interference or its
effects from ‘us’ at all. Have you ever seen Dada making a note
about you?
Questioner: Never.
Dadashri: Yes, there is no note on anyone.
Questioner: So is that pure love?
Dadashri: Yes, it is pure love. So you will never be
unloved by ‘us’, you will always be dear to ‘us’. ‘We’ have no
concern with what you said to ‘us’ two days ago. If ‘we’ keep
mental notes, then ‘we’ would have problems, right? ‘We’
understand that your weakness has not gone away and so
mistakes are bound to occur.

162

Aptavani-9

Questioner: But I have a habit of making intense mental
notes.
Dadashri: That habit will now go down now that you
have heard this satsang. Do you not understand all this? From
the moment you hear this; you will start making fewer notes. You
keep an intense mental note of your wife too, do you not?
Questioner: Yes.
Dadashri: The ‘wife’ whom you call your own! You
keep a note even about her? And she does the same about you.
If you say something to her, she will say to herself, ‘Wait till I
have my moment.’ That is not true love; it is aasakti
(infatuation). True love will lessen or change. ‘Our’ love is true
love. ‘We’ never make a note of anything.
Questioner: With your grace (krupa) this can happen
fast.
Dadashri: ‘Our’ grace and blessing is always there but
what can anyone do when you do not want to get rid of it
yourself? ‘My wife did this, she did that,’ do you not do the
same, so why are you accusing your wife? She will make an
intense mental note when you make an intense mental note.
‘We’ do not make a note of anyone and so no one makes a
note of ‘us’. They do not make a note even when ‘we’ scold
them. Why do you have to make a note when ‘we’ have
stopped doing so? Is your wife going to leave you alone when
you make notes of her? It is good that this man here is not
married, otherwise would he not start making notes of his wife?
‘We’ never make any note about anyone. Also ‘we’ do not talk
about one person to another.
Destroy mistakes scientifically
Questioner: Dada what is the reason behind one making
intense mental notes?
Dadashri: One does not realize the harm it causes and

Aptavani-9

163

that is why he continues to do so. Now that he understands this,
he will tend to do less of it.
You are now convinced (pratiti) that it is wrong to keep
intense mental notes. Now you will experience (anubhav) the
benefits of not doing so. You will gradually taste the benefits of
this and then it will manifest in your conduct (charitra). This is
how it works.
So if one wants to be free of such conduct (acharan),
one must first have a conviction (pratiti) of it, then he will come
to experience (anubhav) it and then the negative conduct
(charitra) will go away. So everything happens through a
scientific process and hence the results are scientific. If you want
to climb stairs, can you do it in one leap? You can only do it step
by step. You cannot do it in one leap.
You have never heard this word nondha (keeping mental
notes), before, have you? Is this not the first time?
Making intense mental notes increases
enmity
So do not keep an intense mental note of anything. What
have you gained so far by keeping such notes? On the contrary,
miseries have increased. So do not keep intense mental notes.
Have you not observed that Dada does not keep any notes?
Questioner: I experienced that today. Otherwise, we
would not know that you do not make mental notes.
Dadashri: But you must be seeing that Dada does not
keep a note, do you not?
Questioner: Yes, you do not keep notes but you
remember everything, do you not?
Dadashri: Yes, I remember but I do not keep notes.
Questioner: What is the difference between the two,
Dada?

164

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: When an intense mental note (nondha) is
made on someone, it means that you are harboring vengeance
within towards him. And to remember (yaad) means it is merely
related to ‘this man has certain weakness in him’, that is all. I
remember that he has certain weakness within him so that I can
bless him; that is the reason for remembering. Otherwise, I do
not make a note of anything. If I made a note (nondha) of
something then I would have a tendency to take revenge. So
‘we’ do not make notes. And that is why you do not make
notes against ‘us’, even when ‘Dadaji’ scolds you.
Questioner: There is love from Dadaji, even when he
scolds us.
Dadashri: Yes, so you should not make a note. Half your
miseries will go away if you stop making and keeping such
notes.
Do people in the world keep intense mental notes?
It is their business to keep intense mental notes. They will
say, ‘He did this to me and he did that to me.’
It is because I do not keep notes that you do not keep
notes on me. People will definitely keep intense mental notes on
you if you keep intense mental notes on them. If you take
something from my shop, I will keep a note of it. So then will
you refrain from keeping a note in your own shop? If I do not
make a note to begin with, then the other person will not do so
either. Who will keep notes when dealing with me? Even when
I tell them off or do anything to them! Everything will be fine if
you do not keep intense mental notes. It is not worth keeping
such notes.
Vyavasthit eliminates intense mental notes
The relative knowledge is illusionary knowledge. So then
what is the use of keeping intense mental notes about anyone in
this world? You should not make an intense mental note even if

Aptavani-9

165

your wife says, ‘Your nature is bad. I am going to my parents’
home and I am not coming back,’ because everything is under
the control of vyavasthit. Is it under her control? Is it under her
control or in the control of vyavasthit? So then what happens if
you make an intense mental note in response of, ‘Is that so?
What arrogance on her part! Who the hell does she think she
is? Let her try it!’? What will happen then? A war will break
out!
Questioner: If she talks like that, the mind will go
berserk. One will get very excited.
Dadashri: Yes, he will get all excited and a mental war
will break out. That mental war will lead to a verbal one. It
may even turn into a physical war. What if you remove the
cause of all this from its very root? Everything will clear when
you remove it from its root. So it is not worth getting into all
these problems.
Therefore, it is not worth keeping an intense mental note
of anything. What is vyavasthit? Vyavasthit is when you do not
keep a note of anything; that is vyavasthit. How can you call it
vyavasthit when you make notes and keep them?
Being exact in worldly life will impede your
liberation
If you do not make an intense mental note in the first
place, then where is the problem? Wanting moksha and making
an intense mental note; both these cannot occur together. Do
people refrain from keeping an intense mental note? You have to
stop making notes if you desire moksha. You have to get rid of
such a notebook.
In our business naïve that I was, I was not concerned with
making notes of everything, if things become documented, it was
fine and if it did not, that was fine too. I do not want such an
‘account’ at all; people like me do not keep notes even if they

166

Aptavani-9

have a shop. Otherwise, people keep a note of everything:
‘Chandulal took one pair…Chaturbhai took one pair’. They
write everything down, but they also make an intense mental
note.
We used to keep one notebook in the shop but we would
forget to write in it and so the business suffered. Therefore
making notes improves efficiency of business and brings
precision to worldly interaction, but it will not let you get out of
your worldly life. And now, ‘we’ do not have to trouble
‘ourselves’ by making notes of anything; ‘We’ do not even have
to carry a notebook. What is the point of picking up a pen? It
is good that ‘we’ are so naïve that ‘we’ do not keep any notes.
And therefore, no one keeps any notes about ‘us’. So ‘our’
problem is solved and ‘we’ are free. No note and no problems!
Is that not helpful towards your goal?
Intense mental notes perpetuates the
worldly life
Questioner: It is important Dada but in the worldly life
we have been taught to keep notes.
Dadashri: You need such teachings as long as you want
to remain in the worldly life but if you want to go to moksha, you
need to learn not to keep notes (nondha).
Questioner: In the worldly life one is taught to keep
precise notes of, ‘what he did, what the other person did, and
what I have to do.’
Dadashri: When you keep such notes you become
deeply entrenched in the worldly life (sansari) and the world will
not let you go as long as you maintain such notes. The worldly
life ends when you cease to keep notes.
Questioner: In the worldly life, I am in the habit of
making notes like, ‘this man is very careful and well organized’
or ‘this is what happens when one is careless and disorganized’.

Aptavani-9

167

Dadashri: The fact that you see disorganization and
carelessness is the same as saying that the support of the worldly
life is now disintegrating. Would the worldly life remain when
that happens? Once the support of the worldly life collapses,
can the worldly life continue to exist? People will begin to
wonder ‘what’s happening here?’ But it is when one becomes
carefree and disorganized, without any mental notes that he goes
to moksha. Otherwise, the same old clothes and guise, being
particular about this and particular about that, particular about
money; how can one achieve anything this way? There should
not be any note taking. Here you keep a note of everything
someone told you yesterday.
What do people assert? They say ‘Only this man can go
to moksha. Only when one is so particular and alert will he go
to moksha.’ Whereas I say that only a carefree and disorganized
person will go to moksha. The solution will arise when you
become bankrupt in the worldly shop. So you will have to
bankrupt this worldly shop (sansar) if you want moksha. You
want to be careful, exact and organized and at the same time
you want to go to moksha, both are not possible. How many
persons amongst all these seekers of moksha are there who are
without intense mental notes?
Questioner: The desire of moksha is only in words, is it
not?
Dadashri: That is why I am asking who has come into
spiritualism? Who has come closer to the Self? When one
becomes desire-less and keeps no note of anything, then he
comes closer to the Self. It is not possible to be careful, exact
and precise in the worldly life and come closer to the Self at the
same time. That is why the Lord had said that one will have to
leave home and come to Him if he wants moksha. Why is that?
That is because it will not happen by remaining at home.
For us here in Akram Vignan however, we have to

168

Aptavani-9

achieve all that while living at home. So what do ‘we’ make
people do? ‘We’ make them stop making intense mental notes.
Remain at home but without keeping intense mental notes. What
you need to ‘keep’ in the worldly life is not to be kept here and
what is to be kept here is not to be kept there.
Intense mental note taker is not You: Do
not agree with him
Questioner: What should one who is desirous of
liberation do if making intense mental notes (nondha) has
become part of his prakruti?
Dadashri: You have to tell Chandulal (the relative self),
‘Now stop making notes’.
Questioner: But what should he do about this prakruti
that is bent on keeping intense mental notes?
Dadashri: ‘We’ (the Self and the awakened Lord within)
do not have a problem with the prakruti doing it, do we? In fact
‘we’ are doing it in collaboration with the prakruti. There will
not be any note if ‘our’ collaboration (agreement) goes away.
The prakruti will not even do it; it will get tired of it. If you do
not make a note then the other person will not do it either. If I
do not make a note of what you take from my shop then you
will not do it either. You yourself will say, ‘He does not make
a note so why should I?’ Is that not the rule?
Questioner: Does the making of notes stop naturally and
spontaneously or does it occur when one gets to taste the sweet
bliss of Your Gnan, Dada?
Dadashri: Yes, otherwise such habits do not leave.
Questioner: Otherwise and until then, it is very difficult to
let go of making intense mental notes.
Dadashri: Arey! A person will say, ‘I would rather die
than let go of the note. I would rather throw myself off the cliff

Aptavani-9

169

than forget.’ It is because he feels that, it is his basis for living.
Then if you ask him, ‘will it work if we take away your food?’
He will say, ‘No, I do need the food.’ And yet keeping notes
keeps him going. Keeping intense mental notes will not let go
of anything.
‘We’ are separate from the one making the
note
An intense mental note (nondha) is made because there
remains a tanto (tanto is a link connected to a specific incident,
internal or external.) If a person continues to be upset and noncommunicative (risavu); that is a tanto within him. One cannot
see the tanto (link); it is not evident. But when one makes a
nondha, then know that the link (tanto) exists there.
If someone insulted you yesterday and you make an
intense mental note of it, then I will know that you have a tanto.
This tanto – this link is a very dangerous thing to have. There
should not be any nondha (intense mental note), at all. The
essence of all this is that nothing happens on its own; everything
is vyavasthit. How can there be a nondha in the face of
vyavasthit? A link of intense mental note is a tanto.
Questioner: Even when we do not have a habit of doing
so, we end up making an intense mental note.
Dadashri: Yes, that will happen but you have to erase
it later by saying, ‘making an intense mental note was a
mistake’. Just by saying this, it will be erased. You should be
of the opinion that You are separate from the one taking the
note. Then You are not one (in agreement) with the one
making that note. Therefore, You are not of that vote and
opinion. If You do not ‘say anything’ from within then it implies
that You are in agreement with the opinion of the note. This
note-making is an age-old habit but this Gnan is such that no
note will remain. All your current problems are due to the
intense mental notes.

170

Aptavani-9

Questioner: We have made a habit of making intense
mental notes only.
Dadashri: Yes, but that habit will have to be broken, will
it not? Until now you were ‘Chandulal’ and now You have
become ‘Shuddhatma’. So if that has changed, should this not
change too? Will You not have to let go of the intense mental
notes? How long can you keep making such notes? ‘We’ do not
have any kind of notes, no matter what anyone might say. From
the very beginning, ‘we’ have not kept any notes. What do
worldly people call that? They call it dissipation of previously
held opinions (purvagraha). Call it what you will, call it
prejudice or anything else, but keeping intense mental notes is
harmful. Intense mental note itself is a tanto. How can there be
even the slightest of misery? If there is any misery, it is due to
nondha (mental notes). How can there be any misery in the
ocean of bliss? Is this Gnan not the ocean of bliss?
Questioner: It is Dada, it is.
Dadashri: But do you still not make intense mental notes?
Questioner: Dada, they linger on.
Dadashri: Do not harbor them anymore and if that
happens, erase them. To keep a tanto means to be obstinate.
It means to insist! Don’t you think that people come and say
things to ‘us’ too?
Questioner: But what is the reason to keep a tanto (link
of intense mental note) now?
Dadashri: Yes, keeping a tanto has not helped; it has
only caused the account of karma to fill up.
Why keep a note of changing karmas?
What is the justice of nature when someone insults you?
That person insults you due to the fruition of your karma. The
time of expression of that karma is over for him, and it is over

Aptavani-9

171

for you too. Now, you are done with it, you have nothing to do
with it anymore. But now, you are seeing it again through the link
(tanto) that you have maintained, and are bringing back the
fruition (udaya) of the very karma that has passed and creating
an entanglement. Now, that other person is in some other karma
all together at this time. Is this not worth understanding? This is
very subtle.
There is no closure in this matter of keeping a link
(tanto) is there? And it is verily those who keep such links
(tantos) that look for closure and justice! Where and how can
all this end?
So if someone were to insult ‘us’ yesterday and ‘we’ see
him again today, he would appear as a new person to ‘us’; and
he is new indeed. Not seeing this is verily our own mistake.
We are seeing him in the older form. He is indeed in the new
form. One karma is over, and therefore now he is in another
karma. Will he be in a new karma or will he be in the same
old karma?
Questioner: He will be in another karma.
Dadashri: And we are still in the same old karma. Now
how much garbage is that? Do you ever make such mistakes?
Do you keep intense mental notes?
Questioner: I had a habit of making intense mental notes,
but I do not have it anymore.
Dadashri: So you do not do it anymore, do you? Why
waste a notebook unnecessarily? People keep notebooks.
One man tells this person, sitting here, ‘You dance
according to your prakruti. You are like a top.’ But even then,
‘we’ did not make a note of it. Later, ‘we’ scolded him, ‘What
kind of a man are you? How can you say that to someone like
her?’ Yes, she did not make a note of it either. ‘We’ do not
make notes. ‘We’ will tell the person directly to his face but then

172

Aptavani-9

‘we’ will not make a note of it. It is a grave mistake to make
intense mental notes.
Therefore, pay no attention to anyone, nor complain
about anyone, do nothing. If someone has insulted you, even
then you do not have to come complaining to me or seek justice.
Whatever happens is correct, is that not justice? There is no
question about it, is there? That is how this Vignan (science) is;
it is exact and clear.
The likes and dislikes make one take
nondha
Questioner: Can you give an example how an intense
mental note (nondha) is made?
Dadashri: If you are out walking and someone says to
you, ‘You don’t have to follow this Dada, things will be fine. You
are needlessly creating difficulties for yourself.’ He may use a
few words that you do not appreciate, and so you make an
intense mental note of, ‘Why did I have to meet such a
worthless person?’ Otherwise one would make a note of
something that he likes. So people make intense mental notes of
things they do not like as well as things they do like.
The slightest dislike arises and one will make an intense
mental note of it. If you do not make nondha of your dislikes,
you will achieve moksha. If you do not make a note when
someone does you wrong, you will achieve moksha. That is the
step to moksha and it is the same step that one uses to go down.
The steps that take you up is the same step that takes you down.
Authority to give opinion?
Questioner: What is wrong in giving an opinion
(abhipraya) about something exactly the way it is, if we do not
have a negative intent behind it?
Dadashri: Do you have any authority to say it as it is?
You do not have that vision. You cannot say anything without the

Aptavani-9

173

exact vision. The word opinion is completely unnecessary for
You. You should have only one opinion and that is, ‘There is the
Self and five other eternal elements.’ There is no other opinion.
That is how it should be.
Opinions means there is some attachment (raag) or
abhorrence (dwesh), otherwise opinions will not be there.
Opinions are formed when there is like and dislike.
If you did not like the tea you drank, you will give an
opinion that the tea was not good. So you cannot refrain from
criticizing the tea. Not only that, but you will also make an
intense mental note of it. And in doing so, you also criticize the
one who made the tea. It is because you have criticized the tea,
that you are now ‘married’ to it. So are you likely to stop
drinking tea? No. It is better to have less attachment to anything.
I am not asking you to let go of the tea or the existing
attachments that you have. I am simply saying ‘no’ to opinions
(abhipraya) and the intense mental note (nondha) making. You
can eat and drink and do whatever you like. ‘We’ do not keep
notes of such things. ‘We’ do not have a problem there. Our
Vignan does not raise objections with anything else. There is a
tremendous consequence for making intense mental notes
(nondha). One has to understand this.
The authority of the non-Self reigns where
there is nondha
One cannot refrain from making intense mental notes.
What is the greatest sign of ignorance? It is that of making
intense mental note (nondha). After attaining Gnan, nondha
should not remain. Making intense mental notes and the non-Self
(pudgal) stand together. The non-Self remains as long as there
is nondha; during that time, the non-Self is the authority and not
the Self.
That is why ‘we’ have to say something about nondha

174

Aptavani-9

every fortnight or so. ‘We’ have to keep warning everyone. By
making intense mental notes, the non-Self comes in power and
not the Self. There the Self is powerless.
Intense mental notes and opinion
Questioner: What is the difference between nondha
(intense mental note) and (abhipraya) opinion?
Dadashri: There is a difference. Nondha gives rise to the
worldly life and opinions give rise to the mind. Intense mental
notes give rise to the entire worldly life, the way it was; it
rejuvenates the whole tree, all over again.
Questioner: But it is because we make notes that we
form opinions, is that not so?
Dadashri: That is true but a nondha is not the same
thing as opinion. Opinion is something we give after a nondha
is made. We may give opinion of good or bad, but only if we
make an intense mental note (nondha) of something. But
making a nondha is the biggest mistake. We can deal with
opinions.
Opinions give rise to the mind, which you yourself will
have to deal with later on. But making nondha gives rise to the
worldly life all over again. The one who does not make intense
mental notes, will not have to come back to the worldly life.
Questioner: Is the intense mental note made first and
then the opinion is the verbal expression of it?
Dadashri: Once a note is made it all falls on the side of
the non-Self (the pudgal). The non-Self side starts working and
on the other side the Self comes to a halt. The Self is not to be
found there.
Questioner: So when we make notes (nondha), is there
an opinion that…
Dadashri: There is no problem with an opinion. It is not

Aptavani-9

175

as harmful. Opinion creates a new mind. The harm is entirely in
making intense mental notes.
Questioner: Please explain the difference between
opinions and intense mental note, in detail.
Dadashri: There is no problem if a little of an opinion
remains but there should not be even a fraction of a nondha.
Nondha means the non-Self (pudgal); nondha is exclusively
biased towards the non-Self. When a person makes a nondha,
he reverts to the way he was before. When one who has taken
Gnan makes a nondha, he is no different from a person who has
not taken Gnan.
Questioner: But is opinion not formed only when one
makes a nondha of something?
Dadashri: There is always an opinion behind it. We can
accept an opinion but there should not be any nondha. When
one gives an opinion, that opinion creates a new mind. When
you give an opinion like ‘the soup is salty’ then you give rise to
the mind. But when you make an intense mental note, then the
one who made the soup is made to be the guilty party.
Questioner: What kind of an intense mental note is made
at that time?
Dadashri: Many notes such as, ‘He said this to me…he
said that to me…he spoke in this manner…he spoke in that
manner etc.’ When I make an intense mental note that Chandulal
went to a hotel, whose side am I on? On the side of the pudgal.
There is grave danger in making a nondha.
Questioner: How is an intense mental note of, ‘This soup
is very salty’ made?
Dadashri: Such an intense mental note, ‘the soup is
salty’, immediately places the blame on the doer, the person
who made it. The nondha sees the other person as a doer and
opinion sees only the item.

176

Aptavani-9

You need awareness, not an intense mental
note
Questioner: In short, the machinery of intense mental
note will not remain if there is awareness (jagruti).
Dadashri: It will not remain. The problem lies in the
awareness becoming dim. You have to bring on the awareness,
and not keep any intense mental note. If one does this, then he
becomes that much aware. Or you can increase awareness by
watching ‘us’. A person may say anything to this ‘Dadaji’ and
yet he will not see a single change in expression on ‘our’ face.
Why is that so? Hey you! What kind of results are you looking
for here? ‘We’ have not written an assay on it, an essay starts
from a note, and for a note you need a notebook, and we never
even keep a notebook! Many such people come and go.
Regardless of what ‘we’ tell them on their face, that is not what
‘we’ believe. He is a Shuddhatma. He is not at all at fault! He
is completely faultless (nirdosh) on the outside and he is a
Shuddhatma within. That is ‘our’ vision when ‘we’ speak. As it
is, this is ‘our’ colloquial Patidar language and language cannot
go away, can it? However, ‘we’ do not keep a note.
So all this has to be understood. Making intense mental
notes (nondha) is what causes more damage. Especially these
vaniks (those who make a living through their speech and
intellect, mostly businessman in India), they keep a notebook of
intense mental notes. Women also keep large notebooks. ‘Dad
said this and mom was saying this.’ So everyone keeps notes;
they do not let go of these notebooks. They have still kept the
notebooks, just the way they were before attaining this Gnan.
They have let go of the rest of the things.
Where there is an intense mental note there
is the sting
Some human beings do not keep opinions about others
but they keep more intense mental notes. They keep only the

Aptavani-9

177

intense mental notes. What do these mental notes (nondha) do?
They make the mind carry vengeance; a poisonous sting and
thus it becomes inclined to sting and attack. If someone ‘stings’
you, your mind will become inclined to sting back, so do not
keep intense mental notes. These things go on but do not keep
intense mental notes. He is the victim of the fruition of his karma.
Nondha creates a worldly life for the next life. Nondha does not
exercise its superiority over the mind, nor does it create another
mind in the next life. Nondha is a ‘poisonous’ sting, and one
keeps the ‘poison’ within. When there is too much poison of the
nondha within, it will not refrain from avenging by ‘stinging’.
Questioner: Who makes the intense mental notes and
who forms the opinion?
Dadashri: The ego does both.
Questioner: Does the intellect make a note?
Dadashri: It has nothing to do with the intellect. To give
and take is job of the ego.
Absolute darshan of The Gnani
Making an intense mental note is something very different.
I can understand what I am saying but it is little difficult to show
others. I tell many people not to keep nondha, they even
understand that it is due to their nondha that they are in certain
predicaments.
‘We’ do not keep any note. All circumstances arise, but
‘we’ do not make any nondha.
Questioner: What do you see at that time?
Dadashri: ‘We’ look at the whole picture and not just
the isolated note like, ‘he was the only one running.’
Questioner: But even in the whole picture, he is the one
running, is he not?

178

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: He is part of the picture but I look at the
whole picture.
Along the path of the vitarag…
One becomes a vitarag if he does not make intense mental
notes. One is considered a vitarag if he does not make nondha.
‘We’ are not saying do not make any notes whatsoever. It is
more than enough if your note making decreases so that ‘we’
can realize that you have become somewhat of a vitarag.
Nevertheless, ‘we’ cannot truly use the word vitarag in this
situation.
Now when you keep listening to such talks, things will
automatically begin to release their grip over you. You do not
have to perform any rituals or fast or anything like that. You only
need to understand this.

* * * * *

Aptavani-9

179

[3]
Commonsense : Welding
Deficiency in commonsense
This speech is without attachment or abhorrence. It is
vitarag speech. If a person hears, beholds and absorbs this
speech he will attain salvation. Holding and absorbing this
speech will cleanse all the ‘diseases’ within. It will flush out all
the bad attributes and their parmanus (atoms).
I am giving you the essence of all the talks; this is the
complete and ultimate extract. This is the essence of my
experiences. Otherwise, do you think I can write in a book
‘nobody has commonsense today’? If people read this, they
would immediately come here to complain that they do have
commonsense. If someone were to come to me and tell me so,
I would tell him, ‘Come let’s see. I will come to your house and
stay with you for fifteen days.’ People think they have
commonsense!
If I do not say this people will arrogantly walk around
thinking there is no one like them around.
‘Everywhere applicable’
What is commonsense? It is that which is “everywhere
applicable, theoretical as well as practical”. I have not seen such
commonsense in anyone. Commonsense is such a key that it is
applicable anywhere, it can unlock even the ‘rustiest of locks’
(solve the most difficult of problems). Otherwise, even a new
and the best of locks will sometimes not open. If you can deal
with the worst of men, then realize that you have commonsense.

180

Aptavani-9

Otherwise, people talk without commonsense; they have no
understanding at all.
Have you ever seen a man with commonsense? I have not
seen a single man with commonsense as yet. Big officials ask
me, ‘Have you never seen commonsense in anyone?’ I have to
tell them, ‘From where will they get commonsense? Men fight
with their wives so how can they have commonsense?’ How can
a man with commonsense fight with his wife? How can you fight
with the person you eat, drink and live with? Can you call that
commonsense? Where did you get such commonsense? People
walk around with undue arrogance of, ‘I know something’.
What do they know? And yet men have no idea of what
commonsense is. Everything happens as a result of fruition of
one’s karma.
Even a person the world fears will not refrain from
bickering with his wife. Why does he bicker with his wife? Does
he not quarrel at least three or four times in a twelve-year span?
Questioner: He bickers everyday.
Dadashri: Everyday! So how can you consider him a
man? And then he claims he has sense. Where is the sense? If
he had any sense, he would not fight with his wife. When he has
separation due to difference of opinion with his wife, do you not
realize he lacks commonsense?
Questioner: How can we tell who of the two has less
commonsense?
Dadashri: Can you not know who creates the separation
due to differences in opinion (matbhed) first? Will you not need
some sense?
A man with commonsense will adjust everywhere. He will
adjust even with the person that abuses him, he will say, ‘No
problem, come and sit down.’ So commonsense is required. But
generally one will walk around with a sulking (risavu; upset and

Aptavani-9

181

non-communicative) face if someone tells him, ‘You do not have
any sense.’ Hey! Do you not have commonsense? Why do you
have a sulking face just because someone tells you this? You
think to yourself ‘I have a lot of sense’, don’t you? Just look at
you! You are nothing but a ‘sack of sense’! No one will give you
a dime for your ‘sack of commonsense’ and yet you needlessly
fret over this. A sensible man will adjust everywhere. There is
a shortage of commonsense in the current time cycle.
Have they defined ‘commonsense’ properly? Is this an
old meaning or a new one?
Questioner: Original, it is a new meaning.
Dadashri: It is original, is it not? Has anyone defined it
before? People get excited when I tell them that the meaning of
commonsense is that it is applicable everywhere, theoretically as
well as practically. They tell me that I have defined it very nicely.
So I tell them, ‘this verily is the sign of my failing matriculation!’
The Yard stick of commonsense
You have a degree of C.A. (Chartered Accountant) but
you still have roles to play. You will have to act accordingly; the
roles of a C.A., then the role of a husband to your wife; will you
not have to know all that? Otherwise, your wife will give you
trouble. Is that not so, because you do not know how to deal
with her? She would not give you any trouble if you did. And
your wife has not come to give you trouble; she has come to
make a home for you. But when one of you falls short in your
role, the other party will start to nag; the nagging will start. Yes,
it is because you do not have the know-how!
What do young women say when I ask them for their
opinions about the young men of today? They tell me, “They are
stupid.” Is that not something to be ashamed of, when they say
this?
It is natural for a ten-year old girl to have the maturity and
worldly knowledge a fifteen-year-old boy would have. She may

182

Aptavani-9

be ten years old but she has foresight. Therefore women have
greater foresight, home administration skill etc.
Lack of practical understanding
I asked one lady, ‘Why do you not get along with your
husband?’ She told me, ‘He is so smart and intelligent; you
cannot even begin to talk about it.’ I said to her, ‘It is good for
you if your husband is smart.’ She then says, ‘But he is not
practical.’ So what she is saying is that he does not have
commonsense and so he fights over the most trivial things. Then
she tells me, ‘What should I do, he does not have any
commonsense?’ I told her, ‘I understand everything; you don’t
have to say any more.’ How can one have reconciliation here!
Should a person not have at least some commonsense for
worldly interaction? Should a person not be practical?
So what do I tell the women? I tell them, ‘Listen dear.
What will become of you if your husband turns out to be
someone without practical commonsense? Will you like living a
“nonsense life” with someone like that? Nevertheless, you will
not be able to escape your prarabdha (the effect of past karma;
one’s destiny; karma effect), and yet you cannot do as you wish
either. Such is this world, so if you get a husband without
commonsense, come and tell me immediately and I will ‘repair’
him and give you the keys to have a harmonious life.’ This is
how I solved that woman’s problem.
Your worldly interactions are at their best
when your ego is down
A man without commonsense will not have even an hour
of harmony with his wife! Problems arise because there is no
commonsense. What happens when such a man gets married?
Today he will get a wife; they get together at night and separate
within an hour. To begin with they do not know how to deal with
each other. They do not even know where to begin. Should one
not have the art of how to live in harmony?

Aptavani-9

183

Questioner: One definitely has to have that. He cannot
do without it.
Dadashri: The husband should have commonsense, should
he not? If the wife makes a mistake, he starts fighting with her.
You fool, that mistake did not occur so that you could have a fight.
A man with commonsense is able to understand and settle
differences even with a street vendor. What kind of people get
into fights? A person who has no sense ruins things everywhere
he goes. Is there any benefit in fighting with someone without
knowing the facts; without knowing the circumstances that
caused the poor person to make a mistake?
Questioner: No it does not, it causes harm.
Dadashri: So those who do not have commonsense,
fight. And when they fight, that is the end. It brings an end to the
relationship between the two.
So decrease your ego to such an extent that you can get
along with everyone. Does the ego have threads that you can
turn or twist in order to reduce it? So is this something you do
with or without an understanding? There is no problem with the
ego that has understanding but what good is the ego that lacks
understanding?
Commonsense increases with a mixing
nature (to be social)
That is why I tell you that if you spend time with people,
if you get acquainted with them, it will create affection in their
hearts for you. When you discuss things you can pick up on
people’s experiences and in doing so, your commonsense will
increase. By mixing with people and moving around with them,
your commonsense will increase.
Questioner: You have said that one should live in
harmony with others, but I experience contempt and scorn in
such situations.

184

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: It happens because there is a presence of
contempt. So if you get rid of contempt and live in harmony with
others then your commonsense will increase. When one cannot
have contempt even towards animals, how can one have it
towards human beings? One would understand if you showed
contempt if you had a certain social status, but that is not so.
You cannot be contemptuous.
What do we mean by sense? It is when one gets married
but has only a few conflicts with his wife throughout his life, they
do not have conflicts everyday; that is sensible living. But if a
man is without this sensibility, he brings home a wife, she sulks,
she becomes upset and non-communicative with him and he
does not know how to deal with her; he does not know how
to open the ‘lock’ (solve problems). So what is to become of
the wife?
‘Singing’ in harmony is the key
A husband will not speak with his wife for five days after
they have a row. He does not know what to do there, so how
can he get beyond the stage of being non-communicative? That
relationship will then begin to rust. If this were the case with a
Muslim man, he would immediately know how to appease his
wife and live in harmony with her. Commonsense means to
‘sing’ in harmony with the right ‘note’.
Questioner: What does ‘singing in harmony with the right
note’ mean?
Dadashri: It means that his method is similar to ‘ours’. It
means to handle matters the way I do. What would a Muslim
gentleman say? ‘I will never fight with my wife. She will fight
with me but I will not fight with her.’
A man with commonsense will not say, ‘such is my
predicament, what should I do?’ If it is not applicable, then it is
not commonsense.

Aptavani-9

185

Commonsense avoids conflicts
Questioner: If a person had commonsense, would he not
find solutions to everything?
Dadashri: He would solve all kinds of problems; he
would solve all worldly entanglements.
Questioner: Does he have any conflicts?
Dadashri: There will be less conflict. Commonsense
reduces conflicts.
Questioner: Does that mean where there is conflicts,
there is no commonsense?
Dadashri: Not like that, but there is less commonsense
there.
Questioner: But who, with the exception of a Gnani, can
stay away from conflicts?
Dadashri: There will not be any conflict where there is
commonsense. A man with commonsense will fix relationships
immediately; even when something goes wrong he will turn
things around. It will not take him long to do so. That is
commonsense. It is “everywhere applicable”.
Questioner: But is commonsense not pushed aside
whenever attachment or abhorrence occurs?
Dadashri: Commonsense is a matter of experience. It
has nothing to do with attachment or abhorrence. Commonsense
is the net experience of the worldly life.
How to stop swachhand (to act according to
one’s own will and intellect)
Questioner: Is insight (sooj) helpful in making decisions
about worldly affairs?
Dadashri: Yes, insight (sooj) is helpful. Where can a
person get such insight if he does not have it? In that case he

186

Aptavani-9

should consult someone he trusts for guidance. In this world,
there is nothing better than to ask for advice before you do
anything. If you ask your boss, ‘Can I go to the rest room?’ and
he says ‘Go’, then it does not matter even if you smoke for ten
minutes while you are there. But if you go without asking him
you will be caught. He will ask, ‘Why did you go to smoke?’
So ask before you go.
Questioner: Does swachhand (acting according to one’s
will and intellect), get destroyed if one asks for permission?
Dadashri: Yes, that is precisely why one needs to ask for
permission - to get rid of his swachhand. That is why you are
told to make a guru. That way you will not be driven by your
own intellect (dahapan)! And whatever the guru says goes one
hundred percent.
If ‘we’ tell this man, ‘go run in this direction’, and he
does not stop to question why, that is defined as him not
having any swachhand. That is when we can say his
swachhand is gone. But if he stops to ask someone, ‘Should
I run in the direction Dada has told me to or not?’ then it is
called swachhand.
Yes, there is no need to ask me anything about worldly
matters. For that you can ask your father or your elders or
anyone who has experience in such matters. Ask them, they will
explain everything to you.
Questioner: But during the time of worldly interactions,
it is the commonsense that is applicable, is it not?
Dadashri: But where will he get commonsense? If he
reads our books, he will attain some insight (sooj) but where will
he get commonsense? Is it anything cheap or worthless?
Straightness increases commonsense
Questioner: Does commonsense increase when one
becomes straight (sarad)?

Aptavani-9

187

Dadashri: Yes, it increases lot. Straight people are easily
deceived, but their commonsense will also increase a great deal
in the process. Someone may cheat a straight person by
charging him more money but in return his commonsense will
increase. Nothing in this world happens without an exchange of
give and take. An exchange of one kind or another will
inevitably take place.
Questioner: Commonsense is applicable everywhere,
right? So then, how does one get cheated?
Dadashri: A person gets cheated because of his
straightness and lack of excess intellect. He may not get cheated
often but he will get cheated one or two times. However, his
commonsense will blossom when he gets cheated. He will
realize that he gets cheated in certain circumstances and so his
commonsense will continue to increase.
Solution with commonsense
Commonsense is a tremendous thing. One man went to
his boss and started to say all kinds of things to him. Because
the boss had commonsense, he was not affected at all. So we
can see a practical application of commonsense here. Any other
person will get discouraged and get very depressed. But I did
not see any depression in this boss. I was observing him to see
whether he would become depressed or not. Despite all the
insults, he did not get depressed at all.
So what do I tell everyone? Solve all your problems with
commonsense. No matter what the other person says, it is all
dependant upon that person’s mind. And it is only because of
your own punya (merit karma) (!) that he speaks that way to
you! No one will say anything to you without your punya(!)
Selfishness prevents full commonsense
Questioner: A person with commonsense may not get
affected but can he become instrumental (nimit) in causing hurt
to someone else?

188

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: Yes, it may happen. It will happen if the other
person is weak, he will be hurt. In this world the weak person
will become miserable. Misery is proportional to one’s inner
weakness. What can a stronger person do if a weaker person
feels miserable? What can a big scary looking man do if people
run away from him in fear the moment they see him? Where is
his fault?
Questioner: A person may have the art of pleasing
others with his words and actions and with such a gift; he is able
to accomplish his work through others, is he not?
Dadashri: All that may be there, but deep within, all
those gifts are the result of selfish intents, and they are not good.
Such gifts prevent the expression of complete commonsense.
Commonsense does not become complete where the slightest
selfish motive exists. Only commonsense without selfishness is
worthy. Thereafter, pleasing others without any selfish motives is
done with the aim of not hurting them. Worldly people on the
other hand, please others for selfish reasons; for fulfilling their
own selfish goals and desires, and therefore such people never
develop full commonsense. This is because commonsense gets
used up in their selfish aim and intent.
Insight (sooj) is a different thing altogether
Questioner: Is it commonsense that in order to quickly
accomplish any worldly task, a person reduces conflicts with
others?
Dadashri: That which accomplishes any kind of work
fast is really insight (sooj). Commonsense is different, it is
applicable everywhere, it will open any ‘locks’ that one cannot
normally open (It can solve problems that otherwise cannot be).
Questioner: Some people get confused when they have
to make a decision while others make decisions very fast, is that
insight (sooj)?

Aptavani-9

189

Dadashri: No, to make a decision is intellect, but to
accomplish an hours worth of work in fifteen minutes is insight
(sooj).
Questioner: Is that what we call practicality?
Dadashri: No, it is called insight (sooj). Many have
intellect and insight. Their intellect allows them to make quick
decisions. Insight is darshan (vision) and intellect is gnan
(knowledge), but they are viparit gnan and darshan i.e. they
are deluded knowledge and vision. Meaning it is worldly
knowledge and vision; it is mithya (wrong) knowledge and
vision.
Selflessness leads to full commonsense
Questioner: The one who has become an expert in
worldly interaction is the true expert, is he not?
Dadashri: Yes, the world considers such a person an
expert. But the one who has developed commonsense to its
fullest is even higher than the expert in worldly interactions. In
the expert the commonsense is one sided whereas in the other
individual (vyavaharikta), the commonsense is all embracing.
Commonsense is from all perspectives and is fully developed.
When one tries to be an expert in one thing, he shuts himself off
from other things. The expert becomes inadequate in situations
that are beyond his expertise.
Questioner: One can be expert only in a limited field.
Dadashri: Yes, he is expert only in certain matters and he
becomes weak and inadequate in others.
Questioner: When one sees the worldly interactions
through commonsense, it is all a calculated approach meaning it
is through the medium of the intellect. And when he sees it
through Gnan, that is when he sees through the enlightened
worldview, he never sees others as ‘doer’; he sees all under the
realm of vyavasthit (scientific circumstantial evidences). What is

190

Aptavani-9

the difference between the two solutions that have been used in
the worldly interactions?
Dadashri: Solution through our Gnan is different.
Questioner: Of the two, which is superior?
Dadashri: The solution through commonsense is superior.
Gnan does not have the level of the specific solution.
Questioner: Solution achieved through Gnan will stop all
inner burning and turmoil.
Dadashri: Yes, it does, but the external worldly work still
remains, does it not? In this respect our mahatmas fall short;
Gnan is not useful in bringing solutions to the worldly tasks at
hand. Our mahatmas lack this commonsense. He (mahatma,
one who has received the knowledge of the Self) marries a
young woman, but does not know how to interact with her and
settle the relationship with equanimity. Even the sadhus and
acharyas (spiritual masters of the traditional Kramic path)
would run away on the third day, if they were made to marry a
woman! Why? They simply have no knowledge of how to deal
with such a life.
Questioner: A person with commonsense will not benefit
as much from this Gnan, will he? That is because his vision is
also directed towards the worldly life.
Dadashri: That is not considered commonsense. Those
are all results of self-interest, they are one sided. Commonsense
is that which is applicable everywhere; it has 360° of applicability.
Such a person is not an expert in any specific task or matter.
Questioner: But the expert’s expertise is in worldly
interactions (vyavaharikta), is it not?
Dadashri: An expert’s involvement is only in one or two
worldly tasks. In other matters he has no expertise. In other
matters he may have zero expertise. The one with commonsense
does not have a zero in any matter.

Aptavani-9

191

Questioner: Dada, is there any connection between
commonsense and Gnan?
Dadashri: The only connection is that Gnan is selfless.
The one who is going to attain Gnan has arrived at the stage of
selflessness. After attaining Gnan, both Gnan and commonsense,
blossom. Otherwise there is no connection between Gnan and
commonsense. All of you here (mahatmas) have Gnan, do you
not? It is because of the lack of any selfish intent; it is because
of selflessness that both commonsense and Gnan continue to
bloom in you. And the one who is selfish, his commonsense
becomes one sided and the Gnan will not blossom at all.
Questioner: But the one who has a selfish interest, his
ability of worldly interactions (vyavaharikta) will improve, will
it not?
Dadashri: It will but it will be only one sided; it will be
only in specific matters. That which is one sided, focused, and
unilateral is not considered commonsense. Commonsense is
applicable everywhere. That is why I have used the English term
‘everywhere applicable,’ so that people will not make their own
‘convenient’ meaning in their own language.
Questioner: But Dada, a person may or may not have
any internal attachment (raag) or abhorrence (dwesh), in this.
Dadashri: Attachment and abhorrence will keep
decreasing if one proceeds selflessly. Only the selfish one has all
the attachment and abhorrence.
Questioner: And does the one with commonsense have
attachment and abhorrence?
Dadashri: His attachment and abhorrence keeps
decreasing day by day, the Gnan keeps increasing and the
commonsense keeps blossoming, everything blooms.
Questioner: Does commonsense increase from all the
clashes that occur if a person knows how to extract the essence

192

Aptavani-9

(taaran – a quick internal assessment, the bottom line of any
situations) of the event of the clash?
Dadashri: Such a person comes to a quick critical
assessment because of selflessness. The selfish person will have
no clue at all and he will not be able to evaluate it at all. So many
such events will occur that will give him the opportunity to
evaluate critically and increase spiritually within, but alas all the
situations go away ‘free of cost’ (wasted). Many such events
occur, but the world forgets, whereas, the one who is selfless is
able to learn very quickly from the ability to see and conclude
decisively through quick critical internal assessment. The ‘taaran’
simply happens.
Questioner: The ‘taaran’ simply happens? He does not
have to do anything?
Dadashri: No, nothing at all. The ‘taaran’ simply
happens for the one with commonsense. And the one with Gnan
simply applies the Gnan for the ‘taaran’ and thereby Gnan
expresses even further.
Questioner: In Gnan one ‘sees’ within that ‘this is real
and this is relative,’ ‘who is the doer?’ ‘Who is this?’ etc.
Similarly, the one with commonsense will have some kind of a
‘light’ that lets him ‘see’, will he not?
Dadashri: The person with commonsense will be able to
open all the ‘locks’ (solve all worldly problems and obstructions)
that are difficult to open otherwise.
Questioner: With what solution, with what keys does he
open these locks?
Dadashri: No, it comes naturally to him; it is part of his
nature (swabhavik) and experience. These are the keys that he
has gained as he passed through the experiences of all the events
that have unfolded in front of him. The experience of an event
leaves within him a key that he uses to get the work done with

Aptavani-9

193

ease. However, an ‘expert’ may get cheated; he too would get
cheated.
Questioner: The one with commonsense will not become
entangled (confused in the task), will he?
Dadashri: He will not become entangled, but he may
allow himself to be deceived (taken advantage of). He may
allow himself to be cheated in order to get himself out of a trap
or a situation of entanglement. These lawyers are all experts.
There are all kinds of experts. They are experts in their own
field, but they also get cheated. The more trusting one is, the
more his commonsense blooms and expresses. The more he
allows himself to be deceived, the more the commonsense
expresses; selflessness also increases.
Questioner: You also say that the one with commonsense
never gets confused and entangled. Then why would he get
deceived?
Dadashri: He will not get confused or entangled once his
commonsense has expressed; once it has blossomed. But he is
bound to become entangled as it is developing, is he not? Also
in the process of gaining the experience of commonsense, one
is likely to be deceived, is he not? His commonsense increases
as a result of being cheated by others.
Questioner: Now when he assesses the situation
(taaran), and searches for his own fault, he is only able to see
his gross, overt (sthool) mistakes, is he not?
Dadashri: No, no. He is not able to see the gross
mistakes, but he gains a lot of experience and knowledge of the
types and nature of people who deceive him.
Questioner: Should the one with commonsense not have
a good study of the prakruti (nature or characteristics) of the
other person?
Dadashri: He has that for sure. That is called

194

Aptavani-9

commonsense. Then only he will be able to open that
(prakruti) lock.
Questioner: Say we want to mend a relationship with
someone that has turned bad but whenever we approach that
person, his behavior towards us gets worse. In that case should
we just maintain our distance and try to work things out?
Dadashri: You have to employ some special techniques
and skills there.
Questioner: Is that considered commonsense?
Dadashri: Yes, that falls under commonsense.
Questioner: In that respect Dada, your commonsense is
of the highest order.
Dadashri: My commonsense is of a different kind all
together. I have traversed through all these experiences selflessly.
I can ‘see’ them all. It is because of selfishness that one is not
able to see them. One has married a woman for infinite life
times, yet is anyone able to get rid of his attachment (moha) for
the woman? And he suffers so much too.
Questioner: And one is not able to get the ‘taaran’ of
that, is he?
Dadashri: No, he is not. Taaran cannot be made
because of self-interest (attachment for a woman). The ascetics
and the acharyas who have made the inner intent of, ‘from now
on I do not want to get married’, is because they have made the
taaran (in their past life).

Buddhi (intellect), Sooj (insight) and Pragnya
(energy of the Soul)
Questioner: Is commonsense based on intellect or is it
based on insight?
Dadashri: Commonsense is based on insight (sooj).

Aptavani-9

195

Sooj is a different thing. It is a natural gift. Everyone has inner
sooj; everyone has insight that helps them do everything.
Questioner: But is insight (sooj) the direct light of the
Soul?
Dadashri: No, it is not a direct light but inner insight
(antarsooj) is a natural gift. Insight helps one to get work
accomplished in the worldly life. It also shows one what to do
and what to avoid.
Questioner: Is intellect not involved in insight?
Dadashri: No, the intellect merely shows profit and loss
and nothing else.
Questioner: So what is the difference between pragnya
and sooj?
Dadashri: Everyone has insight (sooj), even the animals.
A young child runs around according his sooj. Even a puppy has
sooj but it does not have pragnya. Pragnya is the energy and
the light that arises after one attains Gnan.
Questioner: Are all the tasks accomplished through sooj
(insight), good?
Dadashri: Anything achieved through sooj is done well.
Questioner: What is a difference between commonsense
and pragnya?
Dadashri: Commonsense helps solve all worldly problems;
it helps you open all the ‘locks’. However, nothing opens the
lock of moksha. Pragnya does not arise until one attains Gnan;
otherwise pragnya begins upon attaining samkit – the right
understanding, right belief.
Only one key to open all the locks
Having attained this Gnan now, what should You do for
shuddha vyavahar (for pure worldly interactions)? You need

196

Aptavani-9

complete commonsense. You need steadiness (sthirata) and
serenity (gambhirata). Should all attributes not manifest? It will
not do if one of them is lacking and people will not accept it
either. Do you not have to use a key to open a lock? You need
one key that will open all the locks. You cannot afford to have
a large bunch of keys.
Therefore commonsense is to keep the worldly interactions
pure (shuddha vyavahar). And when will shuddha nischaya
(determination to remain as the real Self) remain continuously?
It will when your worldly interactions become pure. And when
will your worldly interaction become pure? It will occur when
commonsense will be ‘applicable everywhere’.
Learn only this in the worldly life
No one has ever ‘disadjusted’ (become estranged) with
me. Whereas here, even four people, cannot adjust with each
other within a family. Can you not learn to adjust by observing
me? Is that possible or not? Will you not learn from what you
see? The law of this world is that you will definitely learn from
observing. No one has to teach you that. What will you not
learn? You will not learn by me giving lectures (updesh) and
preaching. But you will learn with a natural ease if you -observe
my conduct.
It is fine if you do not know anything in this world but you
must know how to adjust in this world. It is fine if you do not
know anything else; you will get by even if you do not know
much about running your business but you should know how to
adjust. One must know how to adjust in all circumstances. You
will suffer if you do not know how to adjust in this time cycle.
Complaint? No just adjust!
You should also know how to adjust at home. What will
your family say if you go home late from satsang? They will tell
you, ‘Should you not come home on time at least?’ So what is
wrong with going home early? A bullock has to be poked with

Aptavani-9

197

a prodder (a stick with a nail at the end) in order to make him
walk, instead would it not be better for him to walk without
being prodded? Otherwise, the farmer will poke him and he will
have to start walking. The bullock is going to walk anyway.
Have you ever seen this? They dig the nail into the bullock to
make him walk. What can the poor dumb animal say? Whom
will it complain to? If you were to prod a person, some other
person will come to his rescue. But to whom can the poor
animal complain? Now why do these animals have to suffer this
way? Their suffering is the result of too much complaining and
accusations in their past life. When they had the power and the
energy to do anything, they kept complaining and now that they
have no power, they simply have to suffer everything silently. So
now you simply have to do ‘plus-minus’, i.e. adjust to
everything. Instead why not stop complaining in the first place?
It is only when you complain that you become the accused. You
should be neither the accuser nor the accused. Credit your
karmic account with any abuse people give you. Do not become
a complainer. What do you think? Is it better to be a
complainer? Then what is wrong with adjusting from the start?
Coming down to the level of others
Questioner: We have to deal with many who are not at
the same level as our self and so often it does not work.
Dadashri: It will not work but you have to adjust and
that is why I have told you do settle with equanimity.
You can make your bright light dimmer, but you cannot
make a dim light brighter. Therefore dim your bright light and
then deal with the other person. When your light increases, do
you adjust it so that it ‘fits’ the person you are dealing with? You
should make it fit that way. You have endless energy and power;
you have to make it fit this way. Take Dada’s name and say,
‘Dada, help me make it fit,’ and it will happen immediately.
Besides you already have decided with your inner intent that you
do not want to hurt anyone even in the slightest degree. If you

198

Aptavani-9

have made that decision, the other person will not be hurt.
Therefore, you have to make that decision first.
This is how you attain oneness
One man asked me, ‘How can we get rid of matbhed
(separation due to differences in opinions) that constantly exists
in our home? Show me a way.’ I told him, ‘Adults have the
matbhed, not the children. Those who have ego and awareness
have matbhed. Therefore, the one whose ego has been
awakened has to say the following, five times every morning,
‘We are all one; there is no separation amongst us.’ Then
oneness will prevail the whole day if you make a decision in this
way and say it out loud together in the home. You have to repeat
it everyday; otherwise the energy of what you have charged will
run down. If there are three people in the home, all three have
to say the same thing.
Questioner: How can those who have differences
(matbhed) come to agree on this subject? What if they have
differences about this suggestion of yours too?
Dadashri: No. It is not like that. No, that is why you say
it if you want to avoid separation due to difference in opinions.
If you do not like the sense of separation, then you should all get
together and do what Dada has said. If anyone asks, simply tell
them, ‘Dada has told us to repeat this sentence five times
everyday, ‘We are all one; there is no separation amongst us.’
Say it five times. When you say it five times, it is possible for that
charge to remain for twenty-four hours. You have to repeat the
same thing the next day otherwise the energy will go down.
When you keep doing this, it will eventually materialize.
Do not encourage negative talk by listening
to others
Otherwise, the world is very different. Even when you
want to avoid separation due to differences at home, outsiders
will drive a wedge between you.

Aptavani-9

199

If someone comes to me and complains about someone
else, I would question him and take him to task first: ‘Why did
you come to tell me this? You came to complain, so you are the
guilty one.’ Write-off everyone who comes complaining in this
manner; such people are called busybodies. You should not
even go near such people. No one has carried on a useless
discussion with me. Even if such a person were to come to me,
he will not be able to say a word. In fact, you should not believe
what people tell you in matters of religion. I would not listen to
anyone regarding even worldly matters. If someone were to say,
‘Hiraba was saying this,’ then I would say, ‘Why did you have
to come and tell me this? What do you gain by telling me what
she said?’
Even in our satsang, you have to find the busybody and
warn others about him. We do not have any attachment or
abhorrence towards such a person but we do have to warn
others.
How dare someone come to us and tell us things? Some
people will come and tell you things as if they are your wellwishers. You should not listen to them when they are talking
about someone else. You should know how to recognize such
people and ask them ‘Why have you come to tell me this? What
kind of commission do you make from doing this? What do you
gain by telling me all this?’
In fact, you should not listen to talks about anyone. But
people’s minds have become weak today. You should not listen
to talks that are destructive or talks that sabotage others; the
reason being if you do, your mind will become adulterated
towards that person and it will affect that person too. Man has
no capacity to understand all this. The other person may be
saying something indirectly and vaguely but the person listening
takes it directly.
And to say anything that will cause difficulties for another

200

Aptavani-9

human being is the biggest crime and yet people do this, don’t
they? A noble human being will cover up anything negative he
hears about anyone. If someone says things in the heat of the
moment, you should cover it up.
‘Welding’: Settling disputes and reuniting
Even before ‘we’ attained Gnan, I would not listen to
talks that created a wedge between people. On the contrary, I
would help mend other people’s break up; I would do the
‘welding’ for them, but I encountered many difficulties when I
tried to patch things up because I did not have Gnan.
Questioner: You say that you had many difficulties when
you helped people reunite because of absence of Gnan, how is
that?
Dadashri: I met with many obstacles. From a very young
age, my nature was to ‘weld’ relationships. I would ‘weld’
wherever there were disputes. ‘Welding’ is the greatest attribute
a person can have. No one will object to it, will they? I had lot
of difficulties while welding but I still persisted.
Questioner: Did it ever occur to you that in trying to
weld people together, one of them did not appreciate it?
Dadashri: No it was not like that. I made sure that both
the parties were in agreement with my welding. The welding
would not occur if it were not acceptable to both the parties.
Welding is a special energy (siddhi). I would bring both the ends
(people) together and then I would weld. But I subjected myself
to a lot of harm in the process. Every time there was nothing but
harm to me.
Questioner: In what way? Can you give us an example?
Dadashri: If two brothers had been fighting constantly,
what would I do? I would do the welding for both of them.
Now how long would my friendship be valuable to them? They
both would value my friendship as long as they were fighting

Aptavani-9

201

with each other. But in many cases, I actually lost money in
these welding. I would have recovered the money had I not
done the welding. After the welding, the two would become one
and I became the outsider. But nature watches all this, does it
not? So I continued doing what I did. But I did have many bitter
experiences. I left it to nature. Had the welding not been done,
even the other person’s wife would tell him, ‘Why don’t you
return his money?’ But after the welding, the wife would not say
anything.
Did you understand this example? Would there not be
many such incidents?
To the Welder…
And what do people generally do? Once they get burnt,
they stop welding and start driving a wedge between the two.
This way at least they maintain their importance and reputation
(rof).
Many people will not cause a rift between two people but
where a rift exists, they would not help mend it either and all
because of their own self-importance (rof). There are also
people who will create rifts between people, but these are few
in numbers. Some will not help mend the rift because it works
out to their advantage. Only a few would make the mistakes I
made! But I used to patch things up everywhere, not just in
certain instances because my desire was to fix, not destroy.
Questioner: Dada this is a great science, the science of
welding.
Dadashri: Yes, it is a great science but the world does
not find it acceptable. Generally, in this world, when two people
meet, one of them will start complaining about someone and the
other person will join in.
Should one not understand what I am saying?
It happened in our family too. The one who tries to patch

202

Aptavani-9

things up takes a beating and the one who does not weld, they
give him a lot of importance, ‘Welcome uncle. Welcome. Come
in uncle.’ But the welding begets one a lot of beating which leads
to vairagya (dispassion towards the worldly life), will it not?
What is the end result? One is overcome with vairagya;
otherwise there is no way to attain vairagya. How is it possible
to attain dispassion in this world? Do you ever feel like
renouncing even a little of it? And if you try to do this kind of
welding, you will always take a beating. In this world, only the
one doing the welding will take a beating. And in the end he is
filled with dispassion; ‘I did it all for their happiness but even
then I end up with all the beating!’ I have taken so much beating;
I have paid a tremendous price in this process.
Do not let your bhaav turn into abhaav
Questioner: Welding was in my prakruti from the very
beginning but I stopped after I got a beating.
Dadashri: It will stop! It is the same for the whole world.
Those raised in a noble home will have the intent of welding.
Then they will stop after they get hurt. They cannot deal with
that. You will get hurt so get involved only if you have the energy
and the strength to take the punishment!
Questioner: As it is, the beating is inevitable. Why ruin
our spiritual progress by getting hurt, instead why not try to
improve things for our atma (soul), for our own inner growth?
Dadashri: Because, when you call someone ‘donkey’,
the Self within understands, ‘He called me a donkey! He called
me names’; there are consequences for that. The Self also
recognizes when the ‘welding (patching up) is being done by
‘him’ (welder). So then, one has come towards the Self and in
the relative realm (pudgal) there is the beating.
Questioner: But there is nothing wrong in it if it
increases dispassion towards the worldly life (vairagya) in this
manner.

Aptavani-9

203

Dadashri: Yes vairagya will increase tremendously but
what will happen if you start to dislike (abhaav) the other
person? What happens if the ego arises, ‘I tried to help those
people but look how they turned out!’ So what will happen if
you start to detest (abhaav) them?
Questioner: That is another hole. Instead of this hole,
that is another hole.
Dadashri: One will dig another hole. ‘We’ did not fall in
that hole despite the big ego. ‘We’ did not have any negative
feelings towards anyone, even while experiencing difficulties.
Insight of welding from the beginning
Questioner: How did you weld? How did you not let
difficulties bother you and still manage to keep your ego from
arising while ‘welding’?
Dadashri: It must be that kind of ego.
Questioner: How can we do the same, now that we
have Gnan?
Dadashri: You will be able to do that when you decide
ahead of time ‘I want to take a beating in the process.’ Either
way, the beating is inevitable. Who does not suffer in this world?
So, why not suffer in the right way?
Questioner: That is true. Otherwise, we take a beating
and we also ruin things in regards to the progress towards the
Self.
Dadashri: No. Now the inner suffering has stopped and
you have to take the beatings, whereas previously you had to
take the beatings as well as endure internal suffering. As long as
there is a body, the suffering will be there. After becoming a
Gnani, ‘we’ have not had to suffer. After Gnan, ‘we’ can see
whose karma is bearing the fruit and how it came about. ‘We’
must have had a part in it, which is why ‘we’ have to suffer the

204

Aptavani-9

beatings now. ‘We’ can see everything. Even then nothing of the
sort comes to ‘us’ now. I had experienced my share of the
beatings before Gnan. How many of these beatings can there
be? Surely, there must be some kind of calculation for this in the
world, should there not? After having united (welded) a father
and son who were at odds with each other, they would become
one, then they no longer had any need for me.
Questioner: Does it ever happen that in trying to weld,
one of the parties will point the finger at you and accuse you of
siding with the other person?
Dadashri: No. It is not like that. I did not have any such
thing within me that they could accuse me of doing that. Even in
my ignorant pre-Gnan state I did not have any such thing that
could become a basis for others to point a finger at me. This is
why I did not have to face such a dilemma. Both the parties
became obliged and were appreciative of my efforts. They
would dine together and do things together and this reinforced
their unity. The problems would arise afterwards.
Welding is an art!
Questioner: But we do not know how to weld and so
it may even go wrong.
Dadashri: That happens because one does not have the
qualifications. That never happened to me. It can only happen
when the person is deficient in his qualifications. However, that
was not the case with me. Everyone accepts what I say; if I tell
them ‘this is how it is’, everyone will accept it. Your state is on
the deficient side.
The state of deficiency in this regard is such that, to begin
with, one is weak and then when he tries to ‘patch and weld
others’ or tries to mend other people’s problems, and so he
‘breaks’ down with others in the process. All these are weak
states. I will never break down. I have never broken down with

Aptavani-9

205

anyone. As long as there is weakness in me, the other person
can never benefit. It is a different matter if someone breaks it
and makes it strong, however I will not break it. If I do not
smoke myself and tell the other person to stop smoking, he may
accept my advice. Surely, one should have this energy to begin
with. If your own friendship with someone is broken and you try
to weld other people’s friendship, the energy within will not
work.
Questioner: What should we do when we are not able
to weld successfully?
Dadashri: If you are not qualified to weld, then what is
the use of trying? Try and do as much as you can and then leave
the rest alone. Your inner intent should be that it would be nice
if they make up. If the welding does not take place methodically
and systematically, then at least keep this your inner intent. You
should not let it destroy your inner intent. You should never
think, ‘It will be good if they separate.’ As it is, there is misery
even in being together! They too are thinking to themselves,
‘Why did I get into this mess?’ but even so it is wrong to
separate them.
Questioner: But Dada, we cannot maintain equanimity at
that moment. At that moment we feel, ‘Why is he doing this?’
Dadashri: There is so much weakness. Is that not a
weakness? That is exactly what will happen when the time
comes. You nourish and nurture a snake and then one day hit
that snake and see what happens? Just test it out, ‘I have fed it
milk for so many days. Now I will hit it’. What will the snake do?
Questioner: Now if the person we are ‘welding’ turns
against us and we feel ‘Why is he doing this?’ is it because we
had set out to do so through the ego?
Dadashri: Yes it was done through the ego. It was done
to taste the sweetness in it.

206

Aptavani-9

Questioner: The inner intent is to weld but we are not
able to do so. At first we feel good and then we let go because
we cannot deal with it anymore.
Dadashri: You should continue to maintain your intent.
Then if the welding is successful, it is good. Have the
understanding that everything that happens, welding or separation,
‘it was their lot and that is why it happened to them.’ This is
what You have to maintain.
Happiness everywhere with welding
The person who knows the answers to, ‘how can these
two people get back together; how can their problems be
solved?’ etc., is the one qualified to be called a ‘welder’.
Questioner: Dada, your welding takes place at a subtle
level whereas welding done by others is at a gross level.
Dadashri: Yes, but there are many at the gross level.
Questioner: I like this quality of yours very much. You
do the welding by making people understand and in the end they
are very happy.
Dadashri: And when they are happy, I am happy too. If
someone is upset and non-communicative (risavu), I will first
ask, ‘is something wrong? What is making you so unhappy? We
all have to die one day so why not live in happiness? And we
will worry about dying when the day comes, but for the time
being at least live happily!’
They will be happy for a year or two but then they will
be back to being unhappy. This body is such that it will bring
unhappiness. Does the body not bring suffering when you get
a headache? So if you experience unhappiness from your own
body, can your husband not bring unhappiness too? Still there
is great fun when husband and wife are united after their
‘welding’.

Aptavani-9

207

Gnani’s original talk
Questioner: The word ‘welding’ is Dada’s original and
unprecedented talk!
Dadashri: ‘Welding’ is itself Dada’s word! If someone
says, ‘I did welding between two people’, that confirms that
they are definitely using Dada’s word. This ‘welding’ is an
original thing. Currently many people use this word ‘welding’.
Questioner: How immense is this science (Vignan)!
Dadashri: I have many such sciences.
Questioner: Why don’t you bring them out Dada?
Dadashri: They will only come out when the circumstances
arise.
Everyone breaks but rare is the One who
patches up
Did you not know that this Dada would not break
anything that has been fixed?
Questioner: I know that but I also know that he patches
whatever is broken.
Dadashri: People come to drive in a wedge. Many raise
objections, directly or indirectly. ‘We’ let go of the ones who are
not in front of me but those who are; ‘we’ will deal with them
directly to their face. ‘We’ have not allowed anyone to get
away. If impediments continue, then they do so for a while
because of past accounts. And if a person does get away with
it, we simply have to understand that there is a fault from the
past, which is now being corrected.
‘We’ are here to solve problems in whatever way ‘we’
can. I have been solving problems all my life.

* * * * *

208

Aptavani-9

[4]
Mamata (Attachment – my-ness) : Lalacha
(Covetousness)
Better to stay away from sticky wet mud
Everyone is a guest in this ‘home’; the world. One is a
guest as long as he stays and then one day he will leave. Have
you not seen them leave? Those with attachment (mamata) and
those without attachment eventually leave, do they not?
Therefore, do not waste even a minute. Why would you
want to waste even a minute of the five or fifty years you are
going to stay? You will pick up ‘stains’ (bind karma). The
clothes (body) will remain here and the stain (karma) will stick
to you and go with you to the next life. So why would you allow
yourself to pick up any stain? Now (after Gnan) you do not pick
up stain everywhere. All you have to do is to be careful while
walking close to ‘sticky wet mud’ (grave circumstances or
incidents that pull you away from Gnan). We are not concerned
about all the ‘flying dust’ (trivial incidents) that dust will fall off
on its own but the mud will stick to you. You can easily shake
the dust off your clothes but you cannot remove the mud so
easily and it will stain your cloth. Therefore, stay away from wet
sticky mud.
The Gnani is without any expectations
Absolute purity (shuddhata) is rare in this world because
the lives of agnanis (worldly people) are relative and are filled
with expectations (sapeksha). Even the lives of the Gnanis of
the Kramic path (traditional religious path) are filled with

Aptavani-9

209

expectations. The Lord has made ‘us’ the only exception. He
has made ‘us’ ‘the one with a life free from all expectations
(nirpeksha)’. There is complete purity here. There are no stains
of any kind here.
Not even a hint of mamata
(attachment; ‘my-ness’)
People of this world cannot be free from expectations;
there is always some expectation. This Gnani is without any
expectation (nirpeksha). He has no attachments (mamata or
mamatva) such as ‘this is my body, my mind, my chit, this is
mine or that is mine’. He has no such attachments (mamata)
and that is why this is a wonderful Vignan.
‘We’ had gone to Surat. There ‘we’ met an ascetic who
was a great renunciant. He practiced renunciation with strict
discipline. Many people would come to do his darshan; that
was the kind of man he was. He told everyone, ‘Come look!
Look! Who is this Dada? If ever I have seen a man completely
free of all attachment (mamata), He is the one. He is completely
free from expectations. I have met some two hundred or so
saints and very religious men but I have not seen a single saint
who is without any expectations. Everyone I met had at least
some expectation or the other, whereas this Dada is the only
man without any expectation that I have seen in my life.’ ‘We’
understood that this ascetic was truly blessed that he could see
this and he knew how to test this criteria in the spiritual path.
I can say this because I knew that there was absolutely no
attachment (mamatva; ‘my-ness’) in me; I did not have such
attachment from a very young age. Therefore, there is no one
in this world without any mamata. Without attachment
(mamata) means a person without ego. You do not have to
look for ego where there is no attachment. A person without
mamata means a person without ego. You don’t have to look
for ego there.

210

Aptavani-9

So what is a Gnani Purush like? He is without any
attachment and He is ego-less. He lives the way nature keeps
him. He does not have any ‘I-ness’ (potapanu).
Where there is no ‘my-ness’ there exists the
supreme Self
Where one has any selfish interest, where there is even a
trace of my-ness (mamata), there cannot be any salvation. God
manifests where there is no my-ness. Ego exists only due to
attachment (this is mine; mamata).
Questioner: Is it possible that mamata gives rise to the
ego, which in turn gives rise to raag (attachment)?
Dadashri: No, it is mamata which gives rise to
everything. Why does the ‘I’ exist? It exists because of ‘my’.
Otherwise, the ‘I’ is the absolute Self (parmatma). ‘My’ means
mamata. Once there is a separation between the ‘I’ and the
‘my’, then what is left? The ‘I’ and that ‘I’ verily is the pure
Soul.
Questioner: Would everyone become a Gnani if they
became free from mamata?
Dadashri: Yes. A person will become a Gnani if he
becomes free of mamata. All those who became tirthankaras,
they were all free from mamata. Mamata can never exist
there.
Questioner: What gives rise to this ‘my-ness’
(mamatva)?
Dadashri: It arises out of greed (lalacha); greed of any
kind.
Questioner: Is it because of what had been done in the
past life?
Dadashri: It is only because you have come into this
Gnan that you are able to understand that everything one

Aptavani-9

211

experiences is due to his actions of the past life. But other
people will not understand this. This is all due to their lalacha
(greed). Their greed is very obvious and visible and wherever
there is greed, mamata is bound to be there without fail. ‘We’
had lot of pride (maan) but ‘we’ did not have any mamata
at all.
Questioner: So does the ego exist because of greed
(lalacha) and my-ness (mamata)?
Dadashri: ‘I’ exists because of ‘my’. Otherwise, the ‘I’
part is the pure Soul if you get rid of the ‘my’ part. The ego will
exist as long as ‘my’ is associated with the ‘I’. He whose ‘my’
is gone, loses his ego and becomes the supreme Soul
(parmatma)! This is as clear as daylight!
The nature of mamata
That in which ‘my-ness’, enters; that wherein one projects
the self, is what we call mamata. For example, when you say,
‘this teacup is mine’, you give ‘my-ness’ to it and so what
happens when it breaks? There is problem even when your
teacup breaks! In fact, if I tell this child to throw away this
teacup, he will shrug his shoulders and say, ‘How can I throw
it away?’ Can you not understand the mamata in this? Why
does he shrug his shoulders right away? Then if you tell him,
‘throw out Dadaji’s shoes’ he will say, ‘I cannot do that.’ Look
how particular those who have understanding can be, it is only
because of the ego that everything has gone wrong. The ego of
‘Hum, hum, hum! Hum means ‘I’.
Questioner: Does the ego dissolve through Gnan?
Dadashri: Ego means ignorance. And Gnan means
absence of ego; an egoless state. So there is no ego that
cannot be dissolved through Gnan. Gnan is the egoless state
and ignorance is a state with ego; there are only these two
states.

212

Aptavani-9

The extent of mamata (my-ness)
The world keeps nurturing and watering the plant of
mamata. One keeps nurturing it by projecting, ‘This is
mine’…‘this is mine.’ If you ask them what is not theirs, they will
tell you ‘this is not ours. This is my brother’s’ Then a few years
later they tell you, ‘My brother has taken away some of our
things’, and then they will go to court. Then they die and their
children will fight complaining about the same thing. Now will
you not call such a person ‘a sack of misguided intellect’? If he
tries to sell this ‘sack of intellect’, no one will pay even a dime
for it, will they?
Their mamata; their ‘my-ness’ goes even as far as, ‘This
country of India, is ours.’ Then what do they claim about the
state of Gujarat? They will say, ‘Gujarat is ours.’ And in Gujarat
some will say, ‘Our district of Charotar is very good.’ One
becomes the owner of entire Charotar! Then in Charotar, a
person from the town of Anand will say, ‘We the people of
Anand are like this’ and a person from the town of Bhadran will
say, ‘Our Bhadran people are like this.’ He becomes the owner
of the whole village. Then people from two different streets from
the same village will argue, ‘Our street is better than yours.’
Then two families from the same street argue about their
families. This goes down all the way to two brothers arguing
about who is better. So it is the same everywhere and people
try to protect their little ownerships. They try to protect (own)
the whole country, and the whole state of Gujarat. What is the
point of spreading ownership all throughout India? One has not
done anything for his own salvation and yet he is busy claiming
and spreading ownership all around.
Now who creates this drashtibhed (a vision of division)?
The intellect (buddhi) creates it. It will be so divisive that it will
make one say, ‘I have nothing to do with those other people.’
‘This is our home, this is ours and that is ours. We do not have
anything to do with anyone else,’ this is how divisive it is; these

Aptavani-9

213

are the kind of divisiveness it creates. If you were to ask
someone, ‘Since you claim this is your home; then you must not
have any separation due to differences in your home.’ He will
tell you, ‘No there is no matbhed (separation due to differences)
in our home.’ But what do they do when they fight with each
other in the home? Do two people not fight with each other in
the home?
Questioner: Yes they do.
Dadashri: What do they do at that time? Will they not
say, ‘You are like this’, and she will say, ‘You are like that.’
Where do these differences end up? It all comes down to,
‘From now on, I am all alone. No one is mine. No one else is
mine.’ This same old divisive vision of ‘yours and mine, yours
and mine’ continues over and over again.
The boundary of mamata (my-ness)
One man tells me, ‘I cannot get rid of my mamata.’ I told
him, ‘How can you get rid of it? As far as you know, whatever
falls within the boundary of your property is yours, is that
correct? Or do you claim you own things beyond that
boundary? You are able to define certain boundaries, are you
not? So can you show me the boundary of mamata? What is
the boundary of mamata? Other people too can show you the
boundary of your house but do you not need to define the
boundary of mamata as well?
People have not seen the boundary of mamata. Everything
looks good with a boundary. Do you look beyond the
boundaries of your home and say that the house next door is
also yours?
Questioner: No.
Dadashri: Does the house not have a boundary too? You
don’t claim the neighbor’s house as yours do you? So, what I
am saying is let mamata be but it should be within a boundary.

214

Aptavani-9

So what should be the boundary of mamata? Your boundary is:
whatever you have mamata for will come with you when you
die; that is the boundary of mamata. So what does the
boundary of mamata mean? It means that as long as you are
living, it will remain yours and not after you die. The Lord has
said to have mamata towards your finger; according to the
Lord you may say, ‘this is ‘my’ finger’, but He has said that we
should not have mamata for the ring on the finger. Why,
because the ring will be taken away; it will be left behind. Will
they not take away the ring? And sometimes if the ring does not
come out, they will even break the finger in order to take it out!
So do not have mamata there.
So that which no longer exists after one leaves this world
is the limit for one’s mamata. Mamata beyond this boundary
should be removed. So what kind of mamata should go away?
The mamata, (my-ness) towards your one and only son
should go away and similarly any other such mamata
elsewhere should also go away. This is not just mere talk.
Elsewhere people can multiply the non-truth with non-truth and
still pass the exam. But one cannot pass the examination of the
Gnani. Here one cannot get by with just idle talks. With the
Gnani you need ‘exactness’.

Mamata of the Insurance Agent
If a ship is sinking and the insurance agent is watching, will
it have an effect on him? If the ship ends up sinking, will he not
have to pay money?
Questioner: Yes, he has to pay.
Dadashri: But will he be affected by it personally?
Questioner: He will not be affected personally.
Dadashri: Why is that? So if something belonging to a
business is lost, who will worry about it? Everyone claims, ‘this
is our’, but do they have any mamata?

Aptavani-9

215

So there should be two kinds of mamata. You should
have full mamata over your body. And mamata that has
spread towards external things should be like this mamata.
‘This house is mine, this watch is mine, this ring is mine,’
all this is extended mamata. But really, they will remove all your
jewelry and everything else when you leave (die).
There should be a boundary (limitations) for mamata.
Should there not be a boundary for everything? So should there
not be a boundary for mamata too?
Questioner: So does that mean one should not have
raag-dwesh towards things of extended mamata?
Dadashri: You should be like the insurance agent who
does not become affected by any losses.
You can have mamata for this body only
So have mamata for only those things that will come with
you. Otherwise, is there anything that will no longer be there
after one leaves? ‘This leg is mine, this arm is mine, this nose is
mine, ear is mine, this eye is mine, this finger is mine, all the
thirty-two teeth are mine…’- there are many such things in the
body. This much mamata is more than enough. Then there is no
interference. There is no need for external and extended
mamata. People have mistakenly created the extended mamata.
It has come about because of a lack of understanding.
Otherwise, mamata should not be extended externally.
Questioner: Does that mean mamata should be for only
the body?
Dadashri: Only for this body and you should have full
mamata for it. You should give it food and drink; there is great
happiness in such mamata. But people do not enjoy that
happiness and instead they take pleasure of, ‘This house is
mine…that is mine…this is my wife, etc.’ No body is going to
be yours! Whatever you believe to be ‘yours’, will not come

216

Aptavani-9

with you. ‘You’ are permanent. Temporary things will not suit
you.
Ultimately when even your own body is not going to be
yours, then how can the wife be yours? Is the wife going to be
yours? What if you keep having mamata towards the wife and
one day she divorces you? There is no such problem with this
body, is there?
Questioner: But what is there in this body that merits
having unnecessary mamata?
Dadashri: Then what on the outside is worth having
more mamata for? So there is nothing that is yours. Whatever
is yours, will come with you; that is the principle. And anything
that is not yours is not going to. So is it not meaningless to have
mamata for anything that is not yours?
Questioner: But how much mamata can there be
towards the body?
Dadashri: There are many things in the body. There are
thirty-two teeth and a tongue that work the whole day but does
not get crushed between the teeth. So it is more than enough if
you increase this much mamata towards the body.
Questioner: What is the benefit in keeping this much
mamata?
Dadashri: When you keep this much mamata for the
body, there is an adjustment for the body. There is arrangement
for everything the body needs. Everything is orderly. What the
eyes need, what the ears need, what the stomach needs,
everything will get what is needed.
Questioner: What if the mamata gets focused exclusively
on the body?
Dadashri: When that happens, just relax and go to sleep
peacefully! But people do not even sleep peacefully.

Aptavani-9

217

Questioner: But people’s mamata is spread out is it
not?
Dadashri: But at whose expense are they extending it?
Everyone has desires, do they not? How much land does a
farmer desire? And there is a limit on the amount of available
land, is there not? People’s desire for land is endless. One
person will say, ‘I want five-hundred acres.’ Another will say, ‘I
want one hundred acres,’ and a third person will say, ‘I want
hundred acres.’ How can this be possible? People suffer
miserably in the process but achieve nothing.
Remove mamata through understanding
One man had a beautiful bungalow. He started to cry
when talks about selling it came up. He said, ‘Do not sell this
bungalow, no matter what.’ He had to sell it anyway because of
financial problems. After the transfer of papers, the bungalow
burnt down. Someone asked him, ‘Hey did your bungalow burn
down?’ He replied, ‘What do I have to do with it?’ The young
man replied, ‘But that was your bungalow!’ so the older man
says, ‘But I had sold it.’ Now it was such a wonderful bungalow
when he lived in it, so why did his mamata towards it go away
a day later?
Questioner: Because he sold it.
Dadashri: But how can his mamata go away?
Questioner: His mamata went away because he let go
of it.
Dadashri: He did not let go of it but he was forced to
let go, was he not? On the contrary, when the bungalow burnt
down, he was relieved. So, did his ‘my-ness’ not go away on
the same day when he sold his property? And what did he get
in return? Papers? Will one’s ‘my-ness’ go away with papers?
Yes it will; did you not see that? And will papers go away or
not? Yes, they will too. So if a mere paper can remove the

218

Aptavani-9

feelings of ‘my-ness’, then what is wrong in you removing it by
way of understanding? And can it not be removed through
understanding? Then one would not cry even if his home were
to burn down, would he?
Questioner: But if the court rules that the transfer of
papers was invalid, then he will start crying again.
Dadashri: Yes, he will start crying again.
Questioner: So why did his mamata not go away till
today?
Dadashri: It will not until he finds a way to do so. And
eventually what does the bungalow of a half million say? It says,
‘Hey! Nagindas sheth, either you will have to leave me or I will
have to leave you.’ So Nagindas sheth says, ‘Where are you
going to go?’ And the bungalow says, ‘I will have to go when
you file bankruptcy. Or else, you are going to go away anyway
(die) and I will remain standing here.’ Now when the bungalow
says this, would one not feel ashamed?
So, people have needlessly extended their mamata. Why
do houses and bungalows not extend their mamata by claiming,
‘only this owner is mine?’ and yet man extends his mamata
towards the whole world.
Questioner: But in the eyes of the world, a man is
considered big if his mamata is well extended.
Dadashri: Yes, he is considered big, but he is just as
miserable. People have needlessly extended their mamata.
The rules in a museum
What causes one to have mamata? It is caused by the
tendency to be worldly (sansari swabhav). This tendency to be
worldly is binding. This binding, the feeling of ‘my-ness’ is
mamata. For that matter has the intellect (buddhi) done
anything less? The world has been made wonderful through the

Aptavani-9

219

intellect and I am telling you not to get trapped; not to become
attached to it. You may eat, drink and enjoy but do not get
trapped and yet people get attached. Do not get attached. Enjoy
it and go to sleep!
What is this world? It is the largest museum! It is a
museum just like the one we have in Baroda. What are the rules
when you enter a museum with your ticket? The conditions are
‘Go in, take your time and observe; and enjoy as much and for
as long as you want to. Eat and drink as much as you want to,
if and when you want. You can enjoy doing all that in the
museum. But you cannot take anything with you when you leave.
If you do, you will be guilty and incur a liability.’ Then why
would you want to mess with anything once you enter in? Just
enjoy the different collections in the museum. You cannot take
anything with you when you leave. This world is a museum that
you have entered. There is a problem only if you touch things or
try to take things out of it. Then one will say, ‘Sir, the problem
is only when I carry it out physically, is it not?’ No, the law says,
you cannot carry it out even in your mind and not with your
speech either. Do not take anything out. Yet, you are free to
enjoy it all. Is there anything wrong with this law?
Questioner: That is true.
Dadashri: Now is it not possible to leave the world in
this same way? But people keep taking things, some even put
things in their pockets and walk out but then they get caught
there, in the next life. And people take many things in their mind,
‘Ah! There is no one like the girl I saw,’ and she will say, ‘I
have never seen anyone like him in my entire life.’ Hey, you!!
What are you going to do with them now?
Questioner: But this ‘museum’ is such that it gives rise to
all kinds of covetousness (lalacha).
Dadashri: Museums are always like that. But when the
law is such that you cannot take anything with you, then what?

220

Aptavani-9

Do you have a custom of taking things away with you in your
town?
Questioner: No.
Dadashri: Then why do you fret and worry in this way?
Simply ‘see’ and ‘know’ (joovo ane jaano)! When the
Alphanso mango arrives, enjoy it at leisure. Enjoy them. There
is no problem. Turn on the fan, turn on the air conditioner, sit
peacefully and enjoy your mangos. But you cannot take them
with you and you must not worry about anything. So the whole
world is a museum where you can eat, drink and enjoy. People
do not know how to enjoy. They eat as if there is a dagger
hanging over their head (under stress). Darn your eating! The
heck with it all! If you are afraid of the dagger, before you sit
down to eat, tell the dagger, ‘fall whenever you want to. I am
sitting here to eat.’ Such is the state of everyone; they sit to
dine with the weight of a dagger hanging overhead. And you
can see it on their faces. Do you not see their castor-oilingested faces?
Questioner: Yes.
Dadashri: So eat and drink whatever you like. Enjoy
your comforts. Women are not the problem, either. Do not get
married if possible, but if you do, keep it as a worldly relation;
understand that it is a temporary state. Do not get married
thinking and believing she is yours forever. People marry as if the
relationship is going to last forever. Do they not?
Questioner: Yes they do!
Dadashri: Now, You (mahatma, the one who has taken
Gnan) get married and so do others. Others say ‘my wife, my
wife, my wife…’ whereas You understand that You are settling
the account of that file (of the wife) with equanimity, because
You have taken the Gnan. But are you able to take anything with
you even though you have claimed it as yours by saying,
‘mine…mine?’ Has anyone been able to do so?

Aptavani-9

221

Questioner: No, no one has so far.
Dadashri: So if there is no allowance and agreement of
taking anything with you, then why this unnecessary hassle? So
do not take anything from this ‘museum of the world’ even if you
like it a lot. If you do, you will have to suffer the consequences.
But instead people put things in their pockets and they try to
sneak out from the other side. Then they have to face the
consequences of their actions when they are caught in their next
life. So do not take anything; enjoy everything but do not make
it ‘mine’. Can you say ‘this is mine’ to anything in the museum?
What do you think?
Questioner: That is true.
Dadashri: Wherever there is quarrel, there verily is myness within (mamata). There is no quarrel with anyone on the
outside. Then he will say, ‘my wife is no good.’ You fool, why
do you say, ‘my’? He still does not let go of his ‘my-ness’. He
would not let go of that, would he?
Questioner: These words ‘my’ and ‘no-good’ are
being used at the same time; such a thought never occurs to
anyone!
Dadashri: Yes, he will even say, ‘my wife is no good.
She is worth divorcing.’ Spoken words have an effect. Every
spoken word will have an effect. The effect of, ‘She is not mine’
remains and the effect of ‘she is mine,’ remains.
Saying, ‘mine’ makes it stick; saying ‘not
mine’ makes it leave
A friend of ours was married for ten years and then his
wife died leaving behind three young children. He used to cry
and so I had gone to console him, as did many others. I asked
him, ‘Why are you crying? What is the point of it now?’ he told
me, ‘But what about these three children? I am lost without her.’
I asked him, ‘but what will you do? Is she going to come back?’

222

Aptavani-9

he replied, ‘But I do not like it without her, what should I do
about that?’ I told him, ‘You do not like being without your wife
now but what if the two of you had met on a train eleven years
ago? You would have shoved past her. You married her ten
years ago but is it possible that even ten days prior to your
marriage, you would have ignored her? Is that possible or not?’
he said, ‘But I did not know her then, did I?’ I told him, ‘Would
you not have insisted that she vacate your reserved seat on the
train had you met her prior to your marriage?’ He asked me
what my point was. I told him that when he sat across from her
under their wedding canopy and looked at her; that was when
he twisted the first knot of ‘my-ness’ with her. The knot of
mamata with her was tied by saying ‘this is my wife’ and she
did the same by saying ‘this is my husband’. I told him, ‘neither
of you had the mamata prior to your wedding day. From the
time you got married, up until now, you have continuously
twisted and tightened the knots of attachment of ‘my, my,
my…’ This created a mental effect; it has created a
psychological effect. You will create a psychological effect
even by saying it just once, whereas this is an effect of ten
years worth.’ He replied, ‘Yes I do agree that a psychological
effect has taken over me. How can I get rid of it now?’ I told
him, ‘Now keep saying, ‘not mine…not mine…not mine…’
and thus unwind the knots exactly the way you had wound
them! This is the only solution.’
In reality there is no bondage. It is merely a psychological
effect that takes place; then when the wife dies leaving three
children behind, the poor man cries. He became happy after I
explained things to him this way. As such there is no relation. It
is all because one believes ‘she is my wife…she is mine…mine’
that the attachment and my-ness (mamata) takes hold. And this
effect will go away simply by saying, ‘she is not mine, not
mine….’ This ‘we’ guarantee you!
Anything that you get attached to by saying ‘my or mine,’

Aptavani-9

223

can be removed by saying ‘Not mine, not mine.’ And if you
want to get attached again, then instead of saying ‘not mine’, say
‘mine’ and you will get attached. Do you understand that? You
do not need any glue for this; it will stick without glue!
Achieve everything even without mamata
This is just a ghost of mamata (my-ness) that has
possessed you. It will go away if I remove it for you. Mamata
is the demon witch and I am the exorcist for it. So if you move
around in this world without mamata, you will get a lot of
respect. But no one lets go of his or her my-ness. I ask people,
‘what do you want?’ What do you crave for?’ and they say, ‘I
have a craving for respect (maan).’ What else? Then they will
say, ‘Something to eat and drink.’ So then let go of this my-ness
(mamata) and you will get whatever you need. But people tell
me, ‘If I let go, I will lose whatever I do have.’ And so they will
not let go.
Entrapment is the consequence of greed
(lalacha)
Greed (lalacha) makes a monkey force his hand through
the narrow opening of a pot, thinking ‘I will take out some nuts’.
He forces his hand through, grabs the nuts in a fist but cannot
pull his hand out because his fist is too wide. He starts screaming
because he cannot pull his hand out. Now why won’t he let go
of what is inside his fist? All he understands is ‘since I was able
to put my hand in, I should be able to pull it out, but why I
can’t? Maybe somebody has grabbed hold of me from the
inside!’ But he will not let go of the nuts in his fist, and he keeps
on screaming. In trying to free himself he tries to pick up the pot
but he cannot because it is stuck in the ground. Then people will
gather around and catch him. This is how people catch
monkeys. People are clever too because they have been there.
They know their ‘relatives’! Don’t they catch monkeys this
way? You will have to understand all this, won’t you?

224

Aptavani-9

Subtle observation of one’s own nature
In the old days, people used to make yogurt in small clay
pots. Cats have a habit of drinking milk and yogurt so what do
they do? They stick their heads in the pot to taste the yogurt
because they can smell it. They will not leave the pot alone.
When no one is around, the cat will force its head inside the pot.
It has the strength to force its head in but not to pull it out. So
then, it walks around with the pot around its head! I have seen
cats do this. Have you not seen such a thing? I used to be very
mischievous so I would find ways of playing tricks. If I could not
then others would teach me. You have to be mischievous in
order to play games like this. It was because of my nature that
I found such tricks.
Questioner: All of us are walking around with our heads
in a pot, Dada.
Dadashri: Arey! People walk around doing just that,
don’t they? I see them all the time. I have broken the pots for
many people, what can the poor people do? How long can they
go around with their heads in a pot? Poor fellows, they cannot
even see.
Questioner: How many such ‘pots’ have you broken?
Dadashri: I will not tell you the number but I have
broken the pots for sure. Now that they can see, they say, ‘I will
not stick my head in the pot again!’ They learn from their
experiences. Having learnt from their experience, they will not
repeat the mistake again.
Belief that creates mamata (my-ness)
There is nothing in the worldly life that hinders you. What
is there in the world to hinder you? Where nothing is truly yours,
you believe it to be yours. Have you made a decision that
nothing is yours? What kind of belief is this? Say if you believe
a certain bank to be yours. And one day when you go there and

Aptavani-9

225

tell the manager, ‘This bank is mine so why don’t you leave?’
What will he tell you? So everything that you believe to be yours
will one day put you in ‘jail’ (causes bondage). So then why
would you want to believe this? Besides what good does simply
‘believing’ do? There should be a firm decision about what is
exact and precise; beliefs have no basis. On the contrary, you
will be ridiculed and thrown in jail.
Everything binds you because you created my-ness
towards it. Nothing belongs to you, not even the body. It would
be your friend if it were truly yours. But look how much pain
and suffering it gives you before it leaves and ‘You’ have to
vacate the ‘home’. In which past life have you departed without
my-ness (mamata)? You have died as an uncle, you have died
as a father; you have done all this. Dying without my-ness is the
entrance to liberation. And if you die with mamata then this
world is always there for you to come back to. You have died
in every past life but that mamata has not gone, has it? It still
remains. Now you have also attained the knowledge that this
mamata is not real and yet it has not gone. It is very difficult to
attain the knowledge that teaches you ‘mamata is not real’; it
is extremely rare and difficult.
The one with mamata is not the Self
I have made you without mamata; attachment or my-ness
and you still do not validate this by saying so. I have made you
without mamata but you still do not say, ‘I too am without
mamata.’
Questioner: But how can mamata go away?
Dadashri: Your mamata is gone after attaining this
Gnan. So now why would you want to remove it again? Your
‘shop’ was a partnership between you and Chandulal and now
it is divided. Chandulal is the one with mamata and there is no
problem with that, but You are without mamata, now. The
partnership in the shop has been divided so with whom does the

226

Aptavani-9

mamata go with? It goes with ‘Chandulal’. It did not come with
You, so Your problem is solved.
This is a museum. It is like a hotel so we drink tea and
so do others. But what do other people do in the museum? They
give all kinds of opinions ‘This tea is very good, the other one
was not. This tea is strong, the other was weak.’ We (the Gnani
and His mahatmas) on the other hand, do not do this. We deal
with whatever comes our way, with equanimity.

Mamata (my-ness) such as the one in a
drama
The Lord has not forbidden one to keep mamata; you
can have mamata but it should be like the one played out in a
drama; it should be perfunctory. Just like the mamata an actor
would show in a play. Do actors in a play not show mamata
(attachment or my-ness)? In the play, King Bhartruhari will
come and then Queen Pingda will come. King Bhartruhari will
cry, but it is all a drama (for the sake of the play). So there
is no bondage or liability from that mamata. Similarly; you
should carry out your part of ‘acting’; eat, drink and enjoy
yourself but do it dramatically. ‘We’ too do the ‘drama’, do
‘we’ not?
Questioner: Can you find anyone with ‘dramatic mamata’
in this day and age?
Dadashri: There cannot be any dramatic mamata. But I
do the drama. How I inquire about Hiraba’s (Dadashri’s wife)
welfare! Once a fortnight she would tell my nephew, ‘Please ask
Dada to come and have dinner today.’ And so ‘we’ have to
go, ‘we’ have to make the time, no matter how busy ‘we’ are
and go there for dinner. ‘We’ have to please her. ‘We’ would
lose whatever little respect there was, if she were to get upset.
But ‘we’ make sure she never gets upset. So ‘we’ go to
Hiraba’s home for dinner. If Hiraba tells ‘us’ ‘Come tomorrow’,
then ‘we’ would go again. Everyone will also comment, ‘Dada

Aptavani-9

227

had come today to eat.’ But what a drama ‘we’ play, even
Hiraba would not realize ‘we’ are acting. ‘We’ would even tell
her, ‘I do not like it if you are not with me.’ She would not
know that ‘we’ are saying it ‘dramatically’. I am telling you
this.
Enjoying without my-ness
When you come here to stay for a few days, you can
enjoy the comforts of a bed, mattress, chair, etc.; there is no
problem with that, but do so without any mamata towards it.
That is called ‘enjoying’, so you have to experience everything
without mamata, enjoy with an understanding of ‘this is not
mine’. Now if the head of the house understands that although
he is the landlord but nothing belongs to him even though he is
the landlord, then how well he would enjoy everything in a
mamata-free state. Then even if children were to jump on his
bed and break it, he would not be affected because he does
not have any mamata; attachment through ownership of that
bed.
Therefore, it is worth knowing all this from the Gnani
Purush. Otherwise you have done nothing but wander for
countless past lives, you have not left any place to wander and
yet the ‘Central station’ (for liberation) has not arrived. Here,
when you meet the Gnani Purush, you have finally arrived at
your destination.
He attains liberation
Now this – liberation through Akram Vignan – is the
Central Station. You do not have to go any further from this
point; your journey ends here. There are no mental difficulties
(adhi), physical difficulties (vyadhi) or externally induced
difficulties (upadhi). Otherwise there is nothing but wandering at
every station anyway and people do exactly just that. People
wander from here to there and from there to here because of
their intense greed (lalacha) of ‘I want this and I want that’. The

228

Aptavani-9

Lord says, ‘Once you fulfill your intense greed (lalacha), come
take my shelter. Then, you and I are one.’ But people have
intense unsatisfied greed for so many things that their wanderings
never cease.
A person can attain liberation on his own if he did not
harbor any intense greed (lalacha). He can discover liberation
if he is not bound by his lalacha. But people keep wandering
(caught up in the life-death cycle) as a result of their intense
greed and they suffer tremendously in the process.
I asked one man who had come here, ‘Do you have any
intense greed (lalacha)?’ he replied, ‘I do not harbor any greed
whatsoever!’ I told him, ‘That is a great adjustment.’ The one
who has never had intense greed can reach the Self.
One loses all sense in intense inner greed
(lalacha)
Questioner: Is there just one kind of lalacha or are
there many?
Dadashri: There is no problem if there were just one
kind. Then it is called greed of one kind.
Questioner: But the intense greed you are talking about
is that of one kind?
Dadashri: No there are all kinds of intense greed
(lalacha). People want to extract happiness from wherever they
can.
Questioner: Is it an illusionary happiness?
Dadashri: Yes, that is it. What else? There is no limit to
it. It is fine if there is lalacha for only sex. Then it is considered
lobh (just greed). Then he would not have an intense greed
(lalacha) for anything else, would he? No. But a person with
intense greed will have all kinds of intense greed (lalacha) he
will be absorbed in all kinds of lalacha.

Aptavani-9

229

Gluttonous greed for pleasure makes one
miss the goal of liberation
If you show a piece of poori (fried Indian flat bread) to
a dog, he will forget his entire family. He will forget everyone,
his puppies, his territory where he lives, the general vicinity of his
residence and he will stray far away from his location. He wags
his tail from lalacha for a single poori! I am a strong opponent
of such lalacha (addictive avarice). I am amazed when I see
this in people, what kind of greed! It is open poison! One
should eat what comes in front, but such addictive greed must
not exist.
Questioner: One’s needs are satisfied without having to
resort to such covetousness.
Dadashri: Therefore, the trouble is for only the covetous
people. Otherwise everything is available right at home. I do not
have any desire for anything and yet I get everything. There is
no desire for anything let alone any avarice.
Questioner: What is the difference between avarice and
desire?
Dadashri: Everyone is free to harbor desire, of any kind.
There is no problem in having desire, but there is with avarice
(lalacha). If you dangle a piece of bread in front of a dog, he
will run from anywhere to anywhere because a gluttonous greed
has taken hold.
Questioner: So with such addictive avarice one loses
sense of what is right and what is wrong?
Dadashri: Insatiable avarice (gluttonous greed; lalacha),
it gives you the right to label a man as an animal! It is an animal
roaming around in the human form.
Questioner: What are the consequences if we perform
religious activities in a gluttonous greed for prestige and fame?

230

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: That is not gluttonous greed (lalacha). It is
natural for one to seek recognition. As long as there is the
worldly life, there will always be a desire to make a name for
oneself; there will be other desires too. That is not considered
gluttonous greed (lalacha). The kind of lalacha I am talking
about is the kind in the example of the dog. If a dog sees a
poori, he will keep hovering around it. He will lose awareness
that he has strayed far away from his location and family. He
loses all awareness.
Everyone has at least some element of such gluttonous
avarice but the term lalachu (the addicted glutton) is reserved
for the one who behaves like an animal in human form.
Say a man brings home some wonderful sweets and
another man (visiting him) loves those sweets. He will sit around
for hours, because of his avarice and greed, hoping he will be
offered some of it. He will leave only when you give him some.
He sits for a long time because of his insatiable greed within. On
the other hand an egoistic person—one who is heavily laden
with the sense of the self—will say, ‘the heck with it, I would
rather go home.’ He will take off. He does not covet. Therefore
this world is bound by such lalacha (excessive greed or
gluttonous avarice) and promise of pleasure. Hey, the dogs and
donkeys have such lalacha, not humans! How dare we humans
have such avarice?
When does a mouse enter a cage? When does it get
trapped in the cage?
Questioner: When there is excessive greed (lalacha).
Dadashri: Yes, it smells a dhebru (small spicy deep-fried
bread) and when it goes to eat it, it gets trapped. When it sees
the dhebru in the cage, it sits outside impatiently thinking, ‘When
shall I go in? When shall I go in?’ and once it enters, the cage
door shuts behind him automatically. Therefore insatiable greed
for pleasure (lalacha) is the cause of all misery.

Aptavani-9

231

Which is harmful, lobh (greed) or lalacha
(covetousness or intense greed)?
Questioner: What makes one intensely greedy and
covetous? Is it the mind?
Dadashri: It is the mind but it is one of the main attributes
of the ego, is it not? Intense greed (lalacha) of past life are
expressed through the mind in this life, and because of the ego,
one will continue to have on going lalacha (intense greed).
Questioner: Which kashayas (anger, pride, deceit and
greed) does intense greed (lalacha) fall under?
Dadashri: Lalacha is a raag kashaya i.e. it is a
kashaya of attachment. When attachment and deceit (raag and
kapat respectively) come together, they give rise to intense
greed lalacha.
Questioner: Does it not come under illusion (moha) as
well, Dada?
Dadashri: You can call it whatever you want, but intense
greed (lalacha) is different.
Questioner: Is deceit (kapat) like intense greed?
Dadashri: This is not even deceit (kapat). This is all
intense greed. Even you would know how to deceive. This is
intense greed. The main thing in intense greed (lalacha) is greed
(lobh).
Questioner: Does that greed (lobh) gradually change to
intense greed (lalacha)?
Dadashri: No. Greed (lobh) arises only after intense
greed (lalacha) arises. There is no problem with being greedy
(lobhi). At least a person with greed will win some day but not
the person with intense greed (lalacha).
A man with intense (lalacha) greed is worse than a man

232

Aptavani-9

with greed (lobh). At least a greedy person will not let swindlers
or con artists starve. Who will make the swindlers go hungry?
Everyone except a man with greed (lobh). A person’s greed is
food for the con artist.
Questioner: Then what is the difference between a
greedy man (lobhi) and a man with intense greed (lalacha)?
Dadashri: A man with intense greed (lalacha) will be
tempted by anything that promises pleasure whereas a greedy
man is greedy about only one thing, for example, his greed
maybe only for money. He will have greed for anything that will
help him get money. Whereas a man with intense greed
(lalacha) will go after whatever he can. He will go for anything
that will give him pleasure. When such a man gets upset, he will
throw a tantrum (tragu). He will try to get what he wants by
scaring people; he will make statements like, ‘I will kill myself.
I will commit suicide.’
Questioner: What kind of intense greed (lalacha) does
he have that he would do that?
Dadashri: He wants pleasure out of something and when
he is denied that pleasure, he throws tantrums like, ‘I will do
this…I will commit suicide.’
Questioner: Usually the intense greed is for sex, is it not?
Dadashri: For sex as well as everything else.
Questioner: So does that include other things like pride
or the need to be worshipped and respected, etc.?
Dadashri: Yes, that too. He will do the same if he is
denied alcohol.
Questioner: Is the intense greed lalacha for the material
thing itself or is it for the pleasure derived from those material
things?
Dadashri: It is all about pleasure; it is not for the actual

Aptavani-9

233

material thing. What is he going to do with things? The intense
greed (lalacha) is for what is derived from such things.
Questioner: Is it not the same for a greedy (lobhi)
person?
Dadashri: A greedy person is better because he has
greed for only certain things. He does not worry about anything
else. Sometimes he does not even care about women or other
things. The only problem he has is with his greed (lobh).
Questioner: Which is worse, greed or intense greed?
Dadashri: Intense greed (lalacha)! A person with intense
greed will not get the opportunity for liberation. Straight people
do not have any such difficulties. The life of a person with
intense greed (lalacha) will remain full of insults and difficulties.
Questioner: But does he feel hurt by the insults?
Dadashri: If that were the case, his inclination towards
intense greed (lalacha) would subside. A person with too much
intense greed (lalacha) is openly shameless (naffat).
Questioner: So the one who has pride (maan) and
wants respect, does not care about intense greed (lalacha)?
Dadashri: The one who is concerned about his pride and
status is not likely to give into other weaknesses. This is because
he is afraid of being insulted.
Questioner: But what if intense greed for pride enters
into it?
Dadashri: Yes, that intense greed is there too. That is the
intense greed (lalacha)! We call that beggary (bheekh) for
respect (maan).
Questioner: But can a greedy (lobhi) person also be a
(lalachu) (one with intense greed)?
Dadashri: No, there is a big difference between the two.

234

Aptavani-9

Greedy means greedy and intensely greedy (lalachu) means
intensely greedy and covetous. A greedy person has awareness
but a person with intense greed (lalacha) and avarice moves
about without any care or awareness (bebhaan) of what is
beneficial or harmful to him; he is constantly harming himself.
Questioner: Does he realize he is harming himself?
Dadashri: No, he does not. He is not aware of it at all.
That is why a person with greed (lobh) can become free
some day. Which kind of person becomes free first? It is a
maani (one with a lot of pride; one who wants a lot of
importance) and a krodhi (someone with anger). These people
are naïve and are easily deceived. Others can see their
shortcomings and will point them out to them however; greed
(lobh) cannot be seen. The one with greed cannot see his own
greed. Greed can be so deep that even the owner cannot see
it. ‘We’ have to point it out to him!
Questioner: Greed will not go away, is it because it is so
deep?
Dadashri: Yes, it will not go away that easily, it will work
a person to death. Nevertheless, a greedy person has some
principles. A person with avarice and intense greed (lalacha) on
the other hand, has no principles. A person with lalacha will not
abide by or practice the Gnani’s Agnas at all. He would not be
able to do so even if he wants to.
Questioner: But what if he has good inner intent and
feelings for the Gnani Purush?
Dadashri: He would not be able to attain anything even
if he has good intentions. So a lobhi (greedy person) can be
freed but not a lalachu – one with avarice and intense greed.
After this Gnan, a little of greed remains somewhat alive
whereas lalacha (intense greed) remains completely alive. But
the greedy person has a ‘safe-side’ (his liberation will occur at

Aptavani-9

235

sometime in future) whereas the person with lalacha does not
have a ‘safe-side’. I have seen this in many places.
A person with greed, most of the time will not be able to
abide by the Gnani’s Agnas, although at times he will be able to.
A person with intense greed (lalacha) will not be able to follow
the Agnas at all. This is the difference between a greedy person
and a covetous (lalachu) one. A lalachu commits spiritual
suicide; he is constantly killing the self.
The craving for pleasure from every which
way
Questioner: What other things are included in this
lalacha (gluttonous greed for pleasure)?
Dadashri: Everything falls into it.
Questioner: Yes, but what type of greed is included in it?
Dadashri: Greed for all kinds of pleasure. Nothing is left
out!
Questioner: Please, explain it to us with some examples.
Dadashri: Everyone understands this. Would anyone
have lalacha for getting beaten? Would anyone have any
lalacha for verbal abuse? Can people not understand what kind
of lalacha there is? It is lalacha of ‘let me enjoy this, let me
enjoy that; let me enjoy everything’; that verily is lalacha (the
insatiable greed).
Questioner: But on what basis is such lalacha maintained
and sustained?
Dadashri: On the basis of enjoying pleasure. Such a
person wants to experience pleasure from whatever and
whichever source available. There is no meaningful goal in life.
Such a person does not care for public recognition or respect
and is impervious to defamation and insults. He runs after
pleasure in a shameless manner. There is no respect for any man
made laws or discipline.

236

Aptavani-9

Questioner: So what is the cause of this kind of
gluttony? How do these avarices originate?
Dadashri: It is to enjoy pleasure from wherever and by
whatever means, to snatch away from whomever he can. There
is no law or principle to what he does. He is not concerned
about how shameful his conduct is in the eye of the society and
much of his gluttony for pleasure is along the lines of public
censure (loknindya) and disgrace. Therefore such gluttony leads
a person into disgraceful acts and does not let him remain
human.
Questioner: So what kinds of bhaav (intents) arise
within such a state of gluttony?
Dadashri: One is driven towards experiencing pleasure
from anything that comes in front of him. Lalacha means to
intensely seek pleasure from the physical and the relative world
all day long.
Questioner: Meaning he wants to experience pleasure at
any cost?
Dadashri: Yes, correct. Our mahatmas who have
attained this Gnan do not seek such pleasures. They settle their
‘files’ (a term used by Dadashri for all non-Self karmic accounts
that come forth in this life after Self-Realization) with equanimity.
Whatever comes his way, he settles with equanimity, he does not
go looking for it.
This intense greed has never been purged in any previous
life and that is why all these miseries exist now. One will find
misery in endless lives but he will not find happiness in any life.
This lalacha is the very cause for all miseries in life. This intense
greed has existed not only in the past life but also in many
previous lives. Now if one were to fracture it in this life, then
everything will be fine and smooth from hereon. As long as it
exists, the danger remains.

Aptavani-9

237

What does our Gnan (Self-knowledge) say? What is in
this world worth enjoying? You are needlessly struggling in
pursuit of these pleasures. The bliss of the Self is the only
experience worth pursuing.
Questioner: The bliss that exists in the Self does not exist
anywhere else.
Dadashri: Where else can bliss exist? All those pleasures
are imaginary. If you imagine happiness (project happiness in
something), you feel happy. One person says, ‘I like jalebee
(crisp fried sweet soaked in sugar syrup) very much,’ and
another person says, ‘when I see jalebee I feel like throwing
up.’ So these pleasures are imagined, not real.
The whole world accepts gold as something precious and
pleasing but the Gnani Purush does not. Even the Jain saints
reject it. The world has imagined pleasure to exist in sex. Sexual
interaction is nothing but sheer filth. How can bliss exist there?

Lalacha for sex; what a demeaning state
Questioner: Are all conflicts and quarrels results of one
taking pleasure from sex?
Dadashri: All this has arisen from sex and there is no
pleasure in it. In the morning, these people’s faces look like they
just took some castor oil!
Questioner: It sends shivers through my body to see
people go through so much suffering just for such a momentary
pleasure.
Dadashri: That is lalacha; intense greed (lalacha) of
enjoying sex. Then when he experiences the miseries of a life in
hell, he comes to the realization of ‘what is there to enjoy in it?’
You can call a man having lalacha for sex, an animal. Sex will
stop only when one shudders with horror at the thought of it.
How can it stop otherwise? That is why Krupadudev has said
that one would not like to even spit at it.

238

Aptavani-9

Questioner: Is it because of lack of awareness (jagruti)
that these faults in matters of sexuality arise?
Dadashri: Awareness cannot remain where there is intense
greed (lalacha). The root cause is intense greed for pleasure.
Questioner: So how does one get rid of his intense
greed (lalacha)? Does he do it by saying, ‘I do not want sex’?
Dadashri: He has to understand facts about sexuality. He
has to understand everything about it very clearly. Sex is
something that does not appeal to any of the senses; the eyes do
not like it, the ears do not like to hear it, the nose does not like
to smell it, the tongue does not like to taste it. It does not appeal
to any of the five senses; he has to understand all this. ‘We’ find
it hard to understand why one is stuck with this intense greed for
sex when even the mind, the intellect and the ego do not like it.
Questioner: One experiences momentary pleasure in it.
Dadashri: No, it is not a question of momentary
pleasure. Everyone is stuck in it because the world indulges in
it and finds it pleasurable.
It is something even the sense organs do not accept.
There is no problem with eating jalebee. Jalebee too is a
vishaya (object of pleasure) but there is no problem with it. It
looks appealing to the eyes and when you break it, you can hear
it crack. It smells fragrant and it appeals to the taste buds. Even
the fingers like to touch it. So, what ‘we’ are saying is that if
your senses accept it, eat the jalebee. But with sex, the sense
of smell finds it so repugnant that one will not feel like eating for
three days!
A lalachu man will beg and bow down to a woman for
sex. That is how unaware a man can become. What I am saying
is that, what is the need for seeking any other pleasure after
experiencing the bliss of the Self?
Sex is nothing but filth! It is covered up filth. One would

Aptavani-9

239

realize it when it is exposed. It is all filth covered with a ‘silk
cloth’. It is a betrayal. One does not remember all this and that
is why he finds himself in this predicament. And what will a
covetous man do? In his intense greed (lalacha), if the woman
tells him to lick the pus coming out of a boil on her arm, he will
do it! Even dogs would not lick in this way! That is avarice and
intense greed (lalacha). His ego will not bother him there; it will
not arise to question, ‘How can I do this? The hell with it, I do
not want this.’ Intense greed (lalacha) can kill a person. The
rule is that if a person eats a lot of onions, he will not be able
to smell onions even if he is sitting next to them. And the person
who does not eat them will be able to smell it even if he is sitting
three rooms away. Similarly, a covetous person is completely
impervious and unaware.
Sex means bestiality! It is a sign of animalistic behavior. Is
it a human behavior? Sex should only be for having two or three
children. After that, is sex even meant for humans?
Conflicts because of it
Questioner: When a person is not successful in his
intense greed (lalacha) for sex, does he not start becoming
suspicious?
Dadashri: He will do everything when he does not
succeed. He will become suspicious and have negative thoughts
disguised in many ways. After that, may the Lord have mercy on
him! It will give rise to further avarice but on top of that, it will
disgrace him. Once it takes control over him, it will disgrace him
without fail.
There is absolutely no relation with the ‘wife’ through the
mind, body, thoughts or speech and so a man should not behave
like he owns her or try to boss her around (do dhanipanu;
dominate as a husband). What is considered dhanipanu? It is
considered dhanipanu, as long as he maintains a bestial
relationship through his mind, speech and body.

240

Aptavani-9

Questioner: But he exercises his dominance (dhanipanu)
and bosses her around only when sex is involved, is that not so?
Dadashri: Bossiness as a husband means to threaten the
wife into having sex. But then he will pay the price for it in his
next life.
Questioner: What will happen?
Dadashri: It binds vengeance (vair). Is any soul likely to
remain suppressed?
When husband and wife have a lot of conflicts, he will say
to her, ‘Why do you walk around sulking?’ She will sulk even
more and she will keep that disdain on her mind. She will say
to herself, ‘I will take care of him when the time comes.’ She
will not refrain from remembering and avenging her disdain.
Every living being will do the same; every living being harbors
this inner grudge of vengeance (rees); all it takes is a little
prodding and teasing and it will express. No one will remain
suppressed by anyone. Each and every soul lives independently
and they have no real connections with one another. It is only
through illusion that everything appears as ‘mine’ and ‘yours’.
Women remain suppressed under societal pressure against
their will and they take revenge in their next life. They may even
bite back as a snake in the next life.
From intense greed (lalacha) to helplessness
and humiliation
One woman used to make her husband prostrate in front
of her four times before she would even let him touch her. The
fool! Instead it would be better for him to jump in the sea and
kill himself! For what do you prostrate four times before her?
Questioner: Why does a woman do that?
Dadashri: That is one kind of ego.
Questioner: But what does she get out of it?

Aptavani-9

241

Dadashri: She does not gain anything; it is the ego that
claims ‘See how I straightened him out?’ And that poor man out
of intense greed lalacha will do whatever she asks. But then she
will pay the price later, will she not?
Questioner: Is she protecting her womanhood (prakruti
nature as a woman - streepanu) by doing that?
Dadashri: No, it is not protection of streepanu. It is a
show of the ego. She treats him like a little monkey. Would there
not be a reaction to that later? He too will remember what she
put him through. He will remember, ‘You took advantage of me
and disgraced me when I was under your control. Wait until you
come under my control.’ Then he will disgrace her and destroy
her in no time.
The touch of a lalachu person will ruin
samskar (moral values)
An avaricious (lalachu) person should not even touch
young boys and girls. His influence will corrupt their values. So
it is better if he does not even touch them. A covetous man will
entice young girls and play with them for his own pleasure; he
will not do that with unattractive children. He will play with
children that look like beautiful rosebuds; that too for his own
pleasure. Now there is no sex involved in this, is there? But still
it is better if he does not touch the children. It is because the
mind of an avaricious person will keep going there over and
over again. Sex is not the only thing that attracts. And in this
case there is no sex, but the attraction is there all the same.
Instead it is better if nothing becomes defiled.
That is purusharth
Is there intense greed only for sex? No, there are all kinds
of intense greed. Eating and drinking, are all these not intense
greed (lalacha)? There is nothing wrong in eating but there
should not be any intense greed for it.

242

Aptavani-9

Questioner: Does intense greed (lalacha) mean that one
gets excited at the mere sight of something?
Dadashri: He will get very excited. But it is good if he
recognizes it as intense greed.
The moment a covetous person sees someone he knows,
he thinks, ‘We will go eat together.’ What should one do for
such an intense greed? He should tell himself ‘I just had
something to eat. I am not interested.’ Should there not be
some self-respect and dignity? People will take you out for
dinner and that impression will remain in your mind, will it not?
Does it get erased from your mind? So when you see that
person again, you will immediately have the thought, ‘it will be
nice if he takes me out again,’ will you not? It is Your job to
turn such thoughts around. That is called purusharth. And you
are at risk for not turning that around - if you don’t, that risk
remains.
Questioner: If we decline his invitation to eat out are we
not insulting and rejecting (tarchhod) him?
Dadashri: How can that be rejecting him? What if
someone tells you, ‘Let us go out for a drink?’ where is the
rejection in that? Why are you looking for sorry excuses like
that? If he invites you, you should go and if you do not like the
food, take it and put it aside. Surely, you should know how to
handle yourself in such situations!
If one eats only one thing, even then there is no problem.
He does not have any other intense greed (lalacha). If he has
intense greed for just one thing, even then there is no problem;
at least he will be preoccupied with just one thing. But avaricious
people are tempted by anything and everything. So wherever
thieving tendencies of intense greed (lalacha) creep in, a
person has to create a safe-side for himself. Intense greed is
very poisonous. There is no problem if lalacha is limited to
only one thing.

Aptavani-9

243

Covetous people take on a liability
Questioner: Is it just one intense greed that is to the
extreme, which traps a person?
Dadashri: Yes, that is what happens. If he has an
important date at the court and he is tempted by something, he
will not show up at the court; by doing this he makes his
problems worse.
Questioner: Such a person is considered very
irresponsible.
Dadashri: Leave alone irresponsibility but he is taking
on tremendous liabilities. He remains undaunted because of his
intense greed (lalacha) and so he takes on tremendous
liability.
A covetous person is always seeking
pleasure
But a covetous person (lalachu) is the owner of every
‘port’. His ship will stop at every port. And the rule is that a
merchant will always find customers.
Questioner: But that is what he is looking for, is he not?
Dadashri: No, not because he is looking for it, but that
is the law. Because when you take some medicine, where does
it go? It goes where there is a problem. How does the medicine
you take through your mouth go to where the problem is? That
is the law; it is attracted there. So what am I saying? Pain
attracts the medicine; it is not the medicine that traps the pain.
So it is the pain that attracts the medicine. You may not be able
to find your medicine anywhere in the stores but your friend
comes along saying, ‘I could not find this medicine anywhere. I
found just this one bottle. The man I bought it from had only
one’, I would tell him ‘Yes, I understand. I understand without
you even telling me!’

244

Aptavani-9

Why has intense greed (lalacha) for this?
Questioner: Is it possible for an avaricious person
(lalachu) to not like working because of his intense greed?
Dadashri: He will not find a job and neither does he like
working.
Now people will tempt you with all kinds of new things
and you will start to wonder, ‘should I take one or the whole
bunch?’ You will come across something to tempt you when
you are about to lose your hard earned money. People will
tempt you but if your intense greed (lalacha) arises, you will
find yourself in a predicament. You should do business that will
help you. You will be successful only if you do business that
suits your prakruti. If you try to do any business that is merely
castles in the air, then you are doomed. One’s own prakruti
too is gullible to such ‘castles in the air’ businesses. The
moment a con artist comes with a proposal, one becomes
tempted and goes for it. It is all ‘castles in the air’. This had
happened to ‘us’ also. ‘We’ have seen all such fake
businesses.
Whether you harbor simple expectations, intense greed
(lalacha) or no greed at all in this world, you will reap the same
fruits. Why then should you have intense greed (lalacha)? These
are perishable, temporary things. They will come back even if
you were to kick them out and on the other hand no matter how
much you beg for them to come, they will not because it is all
mechanical, scientific circumstantial evidence.

Swachhand (intense inner impediment of
doing things according to self-guided ego)
and lalacha (intense greed)
This intense greed that still remains within will kill you.
That is why ‘we’ keep cautioning you repeatedly. Otherwise,
even a very strong person will not make any progress.

Aptavani-9

245

Questioner: But can he not progress if his intense greed
(lalacha) goes away or is overcome?
Dadashri: But alas! The lalacha does not go away. It
takes a long time to get rid of intense greed (lalacha).
Questioner: What is the difference between an avaricious
person (lalachu) and the one who proceeds according to his
will and intellect (swachhandi)?
Dadashri: There is no problem with being swachhandi
but there is a big problem with being a lalachu.
Questioner: What is the difference between atkan
(intense inner obstruction) that impedes one’s spiritual progress
and intense greed (lalacha)?
Dadashri: Atkan is a different thing. It is possible to get
rid of atkan; everyone has intense inner obstacle (atkan) for
sure, but it can be removed. There are many who have atkan
and yet they are also able to abide by ‘our’ Agnas. Atkan is not
the problem. But an avaricious person (lalachu) will not be able
to follow ‘our’ Agnas because when he is faced with situations
that create lalacha within him, he becomes deluded. He will not
be able to maintain awareness.
The tubers of intense greed (lalacha)
Questioner: Is a person born with intense greed
(lalacha) or does it arise through mixing in the wrong company?
Dadashri: One is born with tubers of intense greed
(lalacha).
Questioner: So is the intense greed lalacha from this life
or is it from the previous one?
Dadashri: It is from one’s previous life but in this life he
becomes deluded. If he did not become deluded at the critical
times, then the lalacha can depart. But it is not possible for him
to not fall under delusion.

246

Aptavani-9

Intense greed (lalacha) is the worst thing. It will go away
only when one dies. But because there is the presence of the
seed of lalacha (intense greed), it will arise again in his next life.
Intense greed will not go away and it kills people. Intense greed
is the sign of ignorance (agnan).
Such resolution can make you free from
lalacha
The gluttonous intense greed (lalacha) will disappear
once he makes a resolution, ‘I do not want any temporary things
of this world.’ Otherwise this intense greed in itself is a risk, is
it not? Action is not the risk; avarice and gluttony are. It is a
different thing when you say, ‘I do not want anything temporary
in this world’, and then you accept it if it comes to you naturally.
Excess gluttonous greed is rare amongst ‘us’ (Dadashri’s
mahatmas). Such greed can drag you to hell and will not let you
progress in the Gnan.
Questioner: Will this intense greed (lalacha) persist
even after one attains this Gnan?
Dadashri: It may persist in a rare individual.
Questioner: How can one become free from these
avarices (lalacha) if he wants to?
Dadashri: If he resolves to be rid of it, then it will leave.
One should become free from lalacha, should one not? It is for
one’s own benefit, isn’t it? Once you make a firm decision
(nischaya) that you want to be free from lalacha, you will
become free and you will experience happiness. One has fear of
losing happiness. On the contrary, you will become even happier
and experience bliss once you are free of lalacha.
Questioner: But a person cannot get that benefit until the
fear of losing the pleasure leaves, can he? As long as the fear
exists, it will not allow him to make that resolution (nischaya),
will it? He will not be inclined to leave the greed will he?

Aptavani-9

247

Dadashri: So the intense greed will not leave because of
fear. And he has fear, ‘This pleasure of mine will go away.’ Why
don’t you let it go? Only then will that bliss arrive.
Removing lalacha through the ego
Questioner: In a sense, is intense greed (lalacha) not the
fruition of one’s karma; is it not the effect of one’s karma?
Dadashri: Yes it is, but it is wrong, is it not?
Questioner: So then what causes it to arise?
Dadashri: When the right circumstances arise, intense
greed will arise.
Questioner: Will it go away if he scornfully rejects
(tiraskar) the things he has an intense greed for?
Dadashri: Scorn or not but when he rejects one thing,
there will arise intense greed for another. And there are many
things out there, which create an intense greed within. Just as
there are many things in a grocery store, similarly there are many
things within a lalachu. The problem is solved only when he gets
rid of everything, the whole entire stock all at once! Otherwise,
rejection with scorn (tiraskar) for one thing will cause him to
sink deeper into another. One day, by sitting in our satsangs, it
will go away, but it will not go away suddenly; lalacha is not
easy to get rid of.
There is no way to get rid of intense greed unless you do
it through the ego. You have to have tremendous ego in order
to get rid of it. It can be done; ask Dada for the strength and
then awaken the ego, then you will be able to get rid of it
through the ego. It cannot be rid of otherwise. How can you get
rid of that which has become natural to one’s daily life (sahaj)?
You can get rid of it through your ego, but then you have to get
rid of that ego later. First, you have to get rid of the intense
greed (lalacha) and then the ego.

248

Aptavani-9

So you can also get rid of it through the ego. Then ‘we’
can get rid of the ego for you. Otherwise, how long will it take
to remove this disease of countless past lives? If it is going to
come out, it will come out in the presence of someone like ‘us’
otherwise you can forget about it!
That is when intense greed (lalacha) goes
away
Questioner: Are there any other solutions for one to
become free from his lalacha?
Dadashri: Lalacha will only go away if he lets go of it
himself. If he destroys it completely in every way, then only will
it happen. Otherwise, it is suicidal by nature. Intense greed
(lalacha) means to commit suicide. There is no written solution
for it.
Questioner: How can one get rid of it completely if he
wants to?
Dadashri: No it will not go away completely. If he stops
everything that tempts him, if he does not indulge in his intense
greed (lalacha) for twelve months, then he will be able to forget
it. He needs to remove himself from indulging in experiencing the
pleasure. The lalachu will be ready even if the temptation arises
at two in the morning. He does not even care for sleep.
If he puts aside everything that tempts him and does not
even think about it and does pratikraman when he happens to
think about it, then he can be free. Otherwise, even writers of
scriptures do not have any solution for it. Everything has a
solution, but there is no solution for lalacha. There is a solution
for lobh (greed). When a greedy person incurs a heavy loss, his
greed (lobh) will go away in a hurry.
A person hurts others because of his intense
greed (lalacha)
He runs around whole day in intense greed. Intense greed

Aptavani-9

249

causes inner turmoil. As long as he is in satsang, he feels at
peace and that is why he comes here. Otherwise, he spends his
whole day in intense greed (lalacha).
Even the Gnani Purush’s grace does not work for him.
Even the Gnani’s grace will be defeated there. Lalacha means
deceit. He would not even follow the Gnani’s Agnas, so how
can he be blessed with the Gnani’s grace? He never gives
anyone any happiness and on the contrary because of his intense
greed, he hurts people. All other kashayas (inner enemies of
anger, pride, deceit and greed) face only one death but lalacha
faces the death of countless lives.
Make sure you do not abuse it in this way
Questioner: He will pay for his intense greed (lalacha),
will he not?
Dadashri: He will pay very dearly.
Questioner: Will he not turn it around?
Dadashri: When one’s intense greed (lalacha) hurts him,
he will indulge in another to heal the wound from the previous
one.
Questioner: So he has many ways to heal his problems!
Dadashri: Yes. Still if he remains as the Self, abides by
the Agnas and lets go of everything else, then he will be fine.
However, he is oblivious to the fact that he has intense greed
(lalacha). He is not even aware of it. Would he not free himself
if he were? It is only when ‘we’ point out his intense greed to
him that he becomes aware of it. He believes he is dealing with
everything, with equanimity. How can one be dealing with
equanimity when his behavior is socially unacceptable? How is
that possible? There is no problem if he is intimate with his own
wife, but if his conduct is not socially acceptable and then he
believes he is abiding by Dada’s Agnas, then it is a serious
misuse of the Agnas. It is the ultimate misuse of the Agnas. Even

250

Aptavani-9

an ordinary person misuses the Gnani’s Agnas, but a covetous
person (lalachu) commits suicide when he does; he is destroying
himself. If he has the merit karma (punya), he will become
aware of his lalacha but not otherwise. How can he possibly
become aware? As long as he has interest in it, he is likely to
lose himself in it.
Therefore the seed of lalacha is not destroyed and so it
will sprout if it is ‘watered’. It has not ‘sprouted’ because the
circumstances have not been right for it to do so. However the
moment the right circumstances arise, it will sprout immediately.
We may not see any roots or tubers there, but the tubers are
hidden beneath for sure. They will sprout the moment they get
water. So you should not be of the opinion that it is gone. The
intense greed (lalacha) does not decrease that way, how can it?
An end will come for everyone but not for the lalachu.
Effect of bad company
For countless lives, only this has been ruined; the ruin is
internal, due to the kashaya of intense greed. Man ruins his life
as well as of those around him.
This happens because of bad company (kusang). These
‘tubers’ will not go away once they become established. These
tubers become huge. They would go away if they were small. If
a magnet is large, it will attract and pull a small needle. But what
happens if you try to pull a large piece of iron? Even the magnet
will be pulled towards it. Even if you try to hang on to the
magnet, your hand will get pulled away. That is what bad
company (kusang) is like.
That is why writers of scriptures have said it is better to
take poison and die than be affected by the influence of bad
company (kusang).
Veils over lalacha are very heavy
It is not possible for one to be free from any intense greed

Aptavani-9

251

(lalacha). So when a person with intense greed comes here,
I tell him directly, ‘Shape up here! You have taken a lot of
beating and suffered for countless lives and yet the intense
greed (lalacha) within has not gone. If after coming here to the
Gnani Purush you cannot take care of this problem, what good
is it?’
The speech of the Gnani Purush is vitarag (speech free
from all attachment). So the lashings one gets from this vitarag
speech will hurt a lot, nevertheless these lashings are very
effective. It brings about a tremendous change from within,
however it is not evident externally.
The main attribute of intense greed at work is such that it
will completely disregard even the words of the Gnani Purush.
It will crush the Gnani’s words and discard them. Intense greed
- lalacha! The ego in the form of intense greed in a person will
not break. When ‘we’ give Gnan, this particular ego does not
break; this part remains alive. That is what puts people in such
a grave danger life after life.
The ultimate solution is to follow Agnas
Questioner: Does intense greed (lalacha) not go away
after attaining this Gnan?
Dadashri: It remains alive.
Questioner: So does that mean the Gnan does not have
the desired result for him?
Dadashri: Certain portion of Gnan has given results but
the intense greed (lalacha) is still alive.
Questioner: So does that mean that Gnan has not
produced the kind of results one needs and is that why this
happens?
Dadashri: No. The Gnan cannot give results because
one is a lalachu. Intense greed (lalacha) is at the core; there

252

Aptavani-9

is a tuber of intense greed within! This intense greed (lalacha)
will not allow the Gnan to give result. That is why the scriptures
say a covetous person (lalachu) gradually works his way down
to hell. He will not leave anything alone.
Questioner: Is it possible to remain as the knower-seer
(gnata-drashta) of intense greed (lalacha) after attaining
Gnan?
Dadashri: No. When the time comes, temptation arises
and the intense greed (lalacha) will drag him there and make
him slip. The place where he ‘slips’ is where he loses
awareness. In all other matters he remains very aware, but
during situations, which cause him to slip, he is not able to
maintain awareness.
Questioner: But Dada, he has attained the state of
Shuddhatma. So does He (the Self), not keep ‘seeing’ that?
Dadashri: But he is not able to ‘see’ in situations where
he slips. He sees everywhere else but not there. And he slips
because of intense greed lalacha.
Questioner: Does he slip because he does not remain in
the Gnani’s Agnas at that time?
Dadashri: It is because of intense greed that he cannot
remain in the Gnani’s Agnas. Because of the lalacha he
becomes the self, i.e. he becomes absorbed with the relative-self
(Chandulal). Therefore, he needs to make a great purusharth
(effort) there.
Questioner: Will his intense greed (lalacha) go if he
takes Gnan again?
Dadashri: No it will not. Is it going to go away just by
sitting in the Gnan Vidhi? It will happen only when he makes an
effort to abide by the Agnas and he makes a firm decision to
constantly abide by them. If he breaches the Agna then he must
do pratikraman for it, then he will make progress.

Aptavani-9

253

If he is going to turn around, he will do so by being close
to the Gnani. There, he can turn around if he remains strong
through unity of his mind, body and speech and speaks with a
pure chit; then something can be done and he can turn around.
But intense greed will not allow the chit to become pure
(shuddha). His decision cannot remain firm. Intense greed
(lalacha) will break that determination.
Questioner: But does he not feel on occasion, that he
wants to get out of that trap?
Dadashri: Of course, that may be there, but intense
greed is such that it has to go first, then he can get out.
Questioner: Will it not come to an end if he remains in
the Gnani Purush’s Agnas?
Dadashri: It will come to an end if he gets rid of his
intense greed (lalacha). If he makes an effort and determination
that he absolutely wants to remain in the Gnani’s Agnas and
does pratikraman when he cannot, then he will make progress.
Then he must become ‘regular’; be without conflict with
everyone at home. If he abides by the Agna in order to deal with
equanimity with all his files, then he will become ‘regular’ will he
not? Then he should continue to observe the ‘real-relative’; he
will have to abide by the Agnas.
Even then ‘we’ have to ask him whether he has ‘seen’
everything according to the Agnas. This would not be the
outcome if he had, would it? The result of ‘seeing’ through Agna
would be instant. This is all done through the intellect (buddhi),
which does not help at all. All the talks here in this regard are
also through the intellect.
Questioner: So does he adjust to all the Agnas through
the intellect (buddhi)?
Dadashri: Yes, through the intellect; not through Gnan.
Questioner: So what kinds of result will that produce?

254

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: Nothing at all. The intellect actually destroys
everything. The intellect is temporary and therefore whatever
happens through the intellect is also temporary.
Questioner: No, but how is it with Gnan? What is the
difference between practicing the Agna through the intellect or
through the Gnan?
Dadashri: Agna practiced through Gnan will give results
everywhere whereas application of Agna through the intellect
will not produce any results.
Questioner: What lies where there is such result?
Dadashri: Everything will be settled when it is done with
equanimity.
Questioner: So the results become evident?
Dadashri: It definitely will. He will pass. However
nothing has ever been settled, if you really look. Not even for
a day or an hour for that matter.
Questioner: So the belief, ‘I am abiding by the Agnas.
I have attained everything’ was all wrong?
Dadashri: It is all wrong, what else? It is all a play of the
intellect (buddhi). Anything he says to anyone, whenever he
talks to others, it is all through his intellect. It does not have any
effect but the other person will think, ‘what a great man’. ‘We’
have to tell the other person that truly there is nothing there.
Otherwise, you can easily see the results; you will
experience the ‘fragrance’.
Questioner: So does that mean that one is practicing the
Agnas through the intellect if it does not produce visible results?
I am asking this question for other mahatmas.
Dadashri: No, not for others, it does not affect other
mahatmas. I am talking about those who have intense greed

Aptavani-9

255

(lalacha); if a person is avaricious and covetous, then Gnan has
not really given results in him.
The entire Gnan of ‘ours’ will be present in a lalachu
person; but it will be through the medium of the intellect.
Therefore, it abandons him in the moment of need. It will not
help him during the time of need, it will move aside. It will
appear to look just like this Gnan; one cannot tell the difference.
But in a person with intense greed, the Gnan will slip away at
the crucial moment, but not so for others.
Questioner: Does Gnan through the intellect mean he has
understood this Gnan through the intellect?
Dadashri: For him, this knowledge has manifested
through the intellect (buddhi gnan). Because of the impurity of
intense greed (lalacha) Gnan will not arise. It is a huge problem
for the poor man. He repents a lot but what can he do? There
is not a minute of bliss for him.
Questioner: What if he confesses and repents; does
pratikraman in front of the Gnani for all the mistakes he has
made and then again he follows, with firm determination
(nischaya) what the Gnani shows him?
Dadashri: How can he do pratikraman when he cannot
even see his mistakes? He will be able to see his mistakes
gradually as he progresses forward according to my instructions.
Right now, he cannot even see the mistakes he has already made.
Therefore, when he starts to abide by ‘our’ Agnas, and
then as he takes care of those in his home and everyone around
him, he will begin to see all his own faults and mistakes. And
when he reaches a certain stage of seeing his own faults, then
even ‘we’ will pave the way for him. But what happens is that
when any intense greed (lalacha) arises, he gets sucked into it,
so all his energies get used up in that. The energies that ‘we’
bestow upon him become exhausted in his intense greed
(lalacha). The liability of this falls on ‘our’ shoulders. After

256

Aptavani-9

some positive result, when ‘we’ are convinced, then ‘we’ will
place ‘our’ energies behind him otherwise those energies are
used up in this lalacha and then they become a tonic for
wrong use.
Therefore, it is worth instilling some energy when I can
see he has attained some level of freedom from his kashaya
(saiyam). Otherwise his current predicament is because he has
been getting all the energies, is it not? I have come to this
conclusion.
Questioner: But then you will tell him the ways by which
he can benefit, will you not?
Dadashri: Yes, I will tell him the ways he can benefit. But
if he ever does what I tell him, if he changes his ways with
everyone at home, then he will benefit. Furthermore, he will not
even have any shortage of money.
So first he has to realize and be convinced about his
mistakes. Then his mistake will begin to be destroyed. Then
intense inner spiritual endeavor (purusharth) of a focused
nature has to be made. This mistake is not such that it will go
away without purusharth. It needs tremendous inner spiritual
endeavor (purusharth). Then this will give rise to an energy that
is say twenty-fold. This twenty-fold energy is applied exclusively
to remove this mistake. Then the inner energy will rise forty-fold,
this is the benefit. Tremendous energy will arise in this manner.
Questioner: If he makes an inner intent (bhavna) that he
definitely wants to stay in the Agna, will that give result?
Dadashri: One should remain in the Agnas, should one
not? So he should deal with everything, with equanimity. Then
everyone at home will say, ‘Dadaji, we do not have any
complaints about him.’ Will it not show results within a month?
The correct remedy will always give results. False remedy will
have a result too. Therefore, ‘we’ say take care of those at
home first; bring about some solution right there.

Aptavani-9

257

Only if he brings forth results, will he benefit, right? If he
brings forth a little result, by that I mean if he brings resolution
for ten things, he will get the energy to resolve twenty. Then
spending the energy for twenty will bring forth the energy of
forty. That energy will double again. Then only one will realize
that his energy has increased, otherwise all the energy is
‘dissolved’ and wasted.
Until now he has not been in Agna even for a minute.
Would people at home be hurt if he was abiding by the Agna?
How wonderfully he would win the love of his family by dealing
with them with equanimity. But he does not remain in the Agnas;
he does not even know what the Agnas are. He knows the
Agnas only through the medium of his intellect or words but he
does not understand what it really means. Those abiding by the
Agnas may have some separation due to differences of opinions
(matbhed) but they do not have quarrels. People at home will
not get fed up with him.
Questioner: So in practical terms one has to remain as
the pure Self, do pratikraman and stay away from that which
makes him slip?
Dadashri: Yes, and he should be able to adjust with his
family members. ‘Settling files with equanimity’, is the main
Agna, is it not? And should he not see the pure Soul in everyone
at home? But he does not even think that way; he does not even
have this much awareness.
The solution for this is to make a firm decision that you
want to remain in Dada’s Agnas and then start practicing it from
the next day. Then do pratikraman for the times you did not
remain in the Agna. Please everyone at home by dealing with
them, with equanimity. Despite doing all this, if anyone in the family
gets upset, just ‘see’ that incident and continue ‘seeing’ it. They
are acting that way because of the past karmic account. It is only
today that you have made the decision to abide by the Agnas, so

258

Aptavani-9

win the family over with love. Then, you will notice that things
are beginning to settle down. But you can only believe this if
your family members agree that things are changing and settling
down for the better. Eventually the family will always be there for
the one who has overcome this disastrous kashaya of lalacha.
Then you should not dominate and boss your wife around
(dhanipanu). You are not her boss or her owner (dhani), so
why behave like one? You are a husband in name only so why
behave as an owner (dhani)? There is no problem if you really
were her dhani. Would problems not arise if you try to boss her
around when you are not even her boss? Therefore, you should
not be bossy. When she bosses you around, accept it with a
smile and tell yourself, ‘Oh ho ho! Even you made me pay up
a pending account!’ Isn’t it good that she is making you pay off
your accounts?
There is no problem if you constantly remain in Dada’s
Agnas. Do pratikraman if you cannot remain in His Agnas.
Intense greed (lalacha) for wanting
reverence
There is no telling when intense greed (lalacha) to be
worshipped and revered will sprout within. All one needs is five
to seven people. That is all. These five to seven will tell the entire
city of Mumbai that a ‘Gnani’ has come to town; they will even
make all the arrangements. They will go to the extent of propping
him up, making him presentable, giving him a wig if he is bald!
Alas, one has done only this for countless lives. These
verily are the attributes of it; all the misery and the obstacles are
the consequences of doing just that, this is all one has done. All
he needs is a handful of people to blow the horn, create publicity
and things will start to roll. A person does not realize the
consequences of doing this. It will be great if he becomes free
in this life but that only happens if he understands all this.
Otherwise, intense greed (lalacha) to be worshipped and
revered will not allow him to attain liberation.

Aptavani-9

259

Questioner: But what are the consequences of gathering
people and ‘blowing your own horn’ (preaching Gnan) and
becoming a ‘Gnani’?
Dadashri: That is nothing but a ravaging fire! A life in
hell! He will experience a life in hell and then return here to the
same old thing. Intense greed (lalacha) that exists within will not
go away, will it? He will change a little in the presence of a Gnani
Purush.
Not even a moth will hover (bother) around you if you
have no intense greed (lalacha). A man without lalacha for
reverence is the king of the world. And the one with such greed
will achieve nothing, no matter how hard he tries.
Intense greed can stay alive and get stronger only if you
give it a cause to. Then you have to do pratikraman. You should
say to the relative self, ‘Chandulal, you should not go there again.’
You may have a lalacha (strong desire) to become free
from the need to be worshipped and respected, but this lalacha
will obstruct you. If you keep this in mind to eradicate it, just as
one keeps in mind an external enemy, then you will be able to
do so. Otherwise it is not easy to get rid of this desire to be
worshipped.
Questioner: This intense greed (lalacha) is a dangerous
disease!
Dadashri: It is a disease that has prevailed from
countless past lives. This disease makes him want others to listen
to him and follow him. He is preoccupied with, ‘how can I make
them listen and follow me?’ The moment one sees a mango
dangling on the tree, something within starts stirring too. Just the
mere site of a mango stirring in the wind will cause stirring within
him. The lalacha within will take over the minute he encounters
the right circumstances.
Questioner: Some people are such that they want to be

260

Aptavani-9

the center of attention in a group of a hundred, no matter what
it takes.
Dadashri: That is because he has a habit of being a guru
of five or ten. He does not even know how to be a disciple and
he wants to be a guru. Such a person will sit down wherever he
finds a ‘customer’ (anyone who would listen to him). It is all
because of his intense greed (lalacha) to enjoy everything. He
does not want to leave out a single thing.
Live one life by surrendering to the Gnani
That is why I have told you not to leave the oneness of
this satsang. Otherwise one would want to start something on his
own. But he will not know anything. People will throw him out.
This is not acceptable, how can it be? For how long can a fake
tiger last? Would it work if one disguises himself as a tiger? That
is why I have told you so that you do not let any such root grow
here. You have to spend this life of yours in surrender, do not
let go of your dependency on the Gnani Purush. You will be able
to form your own group or crowd if you try, you will have one,
but it will harm you as well as others.
One man had gone off and started a ‘business’ of his own
in the name of Dada. He attracted large crowds and conducted
satsang. I told him, ‘You will pay a heavy price eventually. How
long will you be able to hide under covers?’ He would return to
us on and off. He was not obstinate. But his intense greed
(lalacha) would lead him astray again and he would say, ‘Now
I will go and do something’, and he was capable of doing that.
One time he managed to gather over a thousand people. He
could do that because his face was attractive and he had an aura
about him. But I cautioned him, ‘If you fail in your obedience to
Dada, you will go to hell. Where are you going to get the
words? You will have to use my words for people. If you try to
use new words, you will spend a life in hell.’
Therefore, I have to caution you. There is this intense

Aptavani-9

261

greed (lalacha) to move away from Dada in an independent
direction. You have now become independent; you are not
dependent are you? It would be a different matter if you were
suppressed or controlled by me. It is a different matter if you
were under the control of those other gurus and you tried to be
independent. Here no one is suppressed, there is no control
over you and I even say, ‘I am everyone’s disciple’, so where
is the problem? But because of the habit of endless past lives,
one has fun in being independent; there is interest in that. Let go
of this interest! Why don’t you remain only in this satsang?
Questioner: But Dada, rather than independence, it is to
show off to people ‘I know something’.
Dadashri: That is the problem, he believes ‘I know
everything’ and yet he knows nothing.
Now spend one life in total surrender (adheenta) to the
Gnani.
Questioner: It is better to remain surrendered; at least
we will not have any externally induced problems (upadhi).
Dadashri: Yes, no upadhi. Everyone has surrendered
and is free from upadhi. But if someone has a root that is
crooked, it will not refrain from playing its part. He will start a
different group. He will dance to a different tune.
Life surrender to gnan
There are many who tell me, ‘Do you not hold back some
‘keys’ with you?’ Why would I hang on to some keys? I would
do that only if I want to remain as a guru and show my
superiority. But I neither want to be anyone’s guru nor do I want
to be a superior. To me, you are the guru now. Those who want
to be gurus will not bestow their full knowledge (gnan) on to
others. They do that so that their disciples will not run away and
their ‘business’ can remain in operation.
And here, everyone has freedom. I tell those who live

262

Aptavani-9

here that they are free to leave whenever they like. I will not
stop them even if they were to put me in a difficulty. So then
where is the problem? Why would I want to take on their
responsibility? The gurus who have intense greed (lalacha) for
reverence will resort to doing such things.
Even the Lord would not question the one who has no
intense greed (lalacha). Because if the Lord were to question
him ‘where have you been?’ then the Lord would be in trouble.
How can he question the one who has no lalacha at all? It
would be a mistake on His part. No one has the right to
question the one who is free from all intense greed (lalacha),
not even God! Once a person lets go of intense greed (lalacha),
he has attained everything.
Your intention should be for the absolute
state
Have you seen excessive intense greed (lalacha)?
Questioner: You know what Dada? I myself was very
covetous and greedy.
Dadashri: Is that so? In what matters?
Questioner: Oh! In everything; I was excessively greedy
about satsang too!
Dadashri: Greed for me (Dada, the Gnani purush) is not
considered greed but it is considered greed if it is for all other
things. Greed for satsang is not called greed. Selfishness is not
considered selfishness if it is for me; it is considered the ultimate
aim (parmarth).
Questioner: Now we are greedy for Dada.
Dadashri: No, with me it is not considered greed. With
me it is not considered selfishness. With me if you become
selfish it is for the ultimate good (parmarth). With the world
even if you try to do the ultimate good it becomes a selfish

Aptavani-9

263

interest. There, even if you try to do the ultimate good, it will
become your selfish interest. People wonder and ask, ‘How can
we be selfish for you Dada?’ Hey, go ahead and be selfish about
me. It will be for your ultimate good—parmarth.
Questioner: I came here because I was attracted but I
have come for the lalacha (greed) to attain Gnan, is that not so?
Dadashri: That is the best lalacha (greed). That is the
highest kind of lalacha worth having. If one does not have such
a lalacha, I would tell him, ‘You are not very shrewd, you have
a deficiency in this area.’ There is nothing in this worldly life that
merits having greed (lalacha) for. Greed (lalacha) for this; the
Gnani and the Gnan is greed worth having. It is great that you
have greed for this.
Questioner: But is this not greed for Gnan?
Dadashri: It is the intention behind the greed that is taken
into consideration, because greed does great work if the
intention is good.
Questioner: This can be considered greed for a good
cause, can it not?
Dadashri: It is not greed for a good (shubha) cause but
it is for the absolute (shuddha) cause. Even giving to charity or
doing something similar is considered an auspicious cause. Then
comes the inauspicious (ashubha) intent. But wherever there is
pure (shuddha) intention, where the ultimate is to be gained; that
is the pure intention.
It is not found in scriptures, it has not even
been heard of…
Questioner: Now who besides a Gnani would clarify
things in this way? Otherwise it is so difficult to become liberated
from this world.
Dadashri: There is no such awareness, is there? It will be
very good even if a person were to recognize that he is in

264

Aptavani-9

bondage. However, because he is in bondage, he feels,
‘Everyone else is doing it’ and so he finds an excuse to do the
same. You fool! Everyone will jump in a well, but does that
mean you have to do the same?
A person becomes ‘fragrant’ if his intense greed (lalacha)
goes away!
Questioner: I have never heard the word lalacha with
reference to spirituality.
Dadashri: No one would make such a distinction, would
they? Who would do that? ‘We’ explain to you things in details.
Those who have read the scriptures will tell you that they speak
about the four kashayas: anger-pride-deceit-greed! So someone
may claim, ‘Sir, but that is in the scriptures too. Tell us
something new.’ Therefore, this has been going on from time
immemorial. When the scriptures were created it was written, ‘It
is an illusion when one sees a snake in a charred rope. Similarly,
this world appears as an illusion.’ Until today there has been no
one to change or alter these words. Everything has been going
on based on these words. This is a simile. They do not know
any other simile. The greatest of men have given the same simile.
Another simile is, ‘One sees silver in a shell’. These two similes
have been used from the time scriptures were written. So why
not say something new? Go ahead and say something new! The
words should be new or they should be with a new effective
design (designed to be effective), and they should be practical.
They should bring about a meaningful change in human beings.
Otherwise, of what good is anything that has been carrying on for
a long time? I too would have found that simile if I were to read!
That is why Krupadudev has said that it is not to be found
in the scriptures, it has not been heard before and yet the one
whose speech gives you the experience, is considered a Gnani.
Otherwise, he cannot be called a Gnani.

* * * * *

Aptavani-9

265

[5]
Maan (False pride, self-importance, the need
to be recognized and respected) : Garva
(Ego of doer-ship) : Garavata (Wallowing in
worldly pleasures)
Maan without mamata :
pride without ‘my-ness’
You can ask the Gnani Purush anything. This Akram
Vignan is such that you can ask anything. You ask anything
about the forty-five Agamas (Scriptures of Jain religion) or the
Vedantas (the end of the Vedas, ancient scriptures of the Hindu
teachings). This Akram Vignan is considered one of the
greatest wonder; it is the eleventh wonder (spiritual) that has
occurred naturally. Here, all your work is attained within an hour.
Questioner: When you had so many good karmas from
your past life, why did Gnan manifest in you at such an old age?
Why not earlier?
Dadashri: It is like this, the gnan-avarniya karma i.e.
knowledge obscuring karma can only break once the mohaniya
karma - karma that is delusive and causes attachment, comes
to an end. When is the knowledge-obscuring veil (gnanavarniya karma) destroyed? It is when the mohaniya karma
comes to an end. What moha (attachment due to illusion) was
there within ‘us’? ‘We’ did not have moha for anything, not for
money, sex or anything. The only moha was that for maan
(pride, the need to be recognized and respected).
Questioner: Yes, can you explain that to us please?

266

Aptavani-9

Please explain in detail, your inner state prior to Gnan
manifesting within you in 1958.
Dadashri: Yes, before Gnan manifested in me amidst the
kashayas of krodha-maan-maya-lobh and raag-dwesh (the
inner enemies of anger-pride-attachment-greed and attachmentabhorrence respectively), the force of maan was the most
dominant. The rest of the kashayas were alive under the reign
and domain of maan (pride). It was the reign of the maan and
not of abhimaan (excessive pride). Abhimaan is maan with
mamata, i.e. this excessive pride is associated with a sense of
‘my-ness’. The pride that I had was without mamata (my-ness).
Questioner: What is pride without my-ness (mamata)
like?
Dadashri: ‘I only’ ‘I am something’ ‘I am something!’
that is what it is.
Questioner: That is called mamata (my-ness).
Dadashri: No mamata is something different. ‘This is
mine’ is extra pride (abhimaan). ‘This is mine. What do you
think of it? It is mine,’ that is extra pride. The extra weight that
is given to the ‘I’ is pride maan. It is natural to have pride; there
is nothing wrong with that. Extra pride (abhimaan) indicates
attachment. Extra pride is the display of my-ness (mamata).
Extra pride will be there only if there is my-ness (mamata). Myness was hardly existent in me. Only this pride of ‘I am
something’ was there and it was all wrong. One does not gain
or attain anything from it. He simply has the belief of ‘I am
something’.
I am talking about my life before attaining Gnan. The other
kashayas of anger-deceit-greed were subservient to this pride.
There was no trace of mamata from the very beginning.
The pride was a belief only in the mind
So he (Ambalal) used to think a lot of himself, ‘there is no

Aptavani-9

267

one like me in the entire world.’ Behold! What he thought about
himself! He had nothing to speak of; no wealth, only ten-vigha
land (four acres) and a home. Besides these, he had nothing but
he went around in arrogance thinking he was the king of the
Charotar villages (northern Gujarat). This is because people of
the surrounding six villages had put me on a pedestal as a
‘bachelor-with-dowry’. Pay the dowry and the bachelor would
agree to marry! A bachelor from these six villages could demand
any amount of dowry before he would agree to marry. These
kinds of comments had fed much arrogance in this mind. And
something in addition, was brought forth from the past life, which
supported such arrogance in the mind.
My elder brother was a very proud man. I used to call my
elder brother a maani (one laden with heavy self importance
and pride) and he accused me of the same. So one day do you
know what he told me? ‘I have never seen a maani like you.’
I asked him, ‘Where do you see the maan (self-importance) in
me?’ and he replied, ‘in everything you do.’
So then I investigated within and I could see that my
maan surfaced everywhere and that was the very thing that had
gnawed away at me. Let me tell you what I did to gain respect.
Everyone used to address me as, ‘Amba-lal-bhai’ (the term
‘bhai’ is a form of respect, similar to Mr. or sir); no one
would call me just ‘Ambalal’. And so I became accustomed to
being addressed as ‘Ambalal-bhai’. Now because I had a lot of
pride, I protected that pride. If someone was in a hurry and
failed to call me by my full name, was it such a terrible thing to
do? How can a person say such a long name in a hurry?
Questioner: But you have that expectation, don’t you?
Dadashri: Then I weighed the incident in my mind. ‘He
called me Ambalal? Who does he think he is? Could he not say
Ambalal-bhai?’ Now he (Ambalal) had some land in the village
and nothing else but what did he think of himself? ‘I am an

268

Aptavani-9

‘Amin’ from the six-village of Vakad—rightful demanders of
dowry from the bride’s parents.’ Don’t we also have ‘Desais’
of Vakad? Even they think a fat lot of themselves, too!
Now if someone failed to address me as ‘Ambalal-bhai’,
I would not be able to sleep. I would be restless the whole night.
What was I going to get out of that? Was it going to sweeten
my mouth? How selfish can a man be? Such selfishness has no
taste, yet one assumes it and takes it on due to societal
influence (lokasangnya). People elevated him - Ambalal; they
put him on a pedestal and they believed he was praiseworthy
too. Hey! What are you going to do with what people think
and believe?
Just because the cows and the buffalos look at you and
wag their ears back and forth, does it mean they are looking
upon you with respect or they are admiring you? This is how
everything is. You might think they are watching you with
respect. It is simply in your head. But really everyone is caught
up in his own miseries; everyone is caught up in his own worries.
No one has time for you.
It was all for maan
I had told everyone, ‘Come and get your work done from
me, whatever it may be; whether it is advice, consolation or
whatever else. I will also give you money if I have some. You
do not have to do my work but I will do yours. This way you
will not have any fear or uncertainties from my end because you
do not have to do anything for me. If I am going home after a
late night movie and happen to stop by your house, you might
think, ‘He has never done this before, he must want something
and that is why he is here.’ On the contrary, thinking this way
about me is the same as looking lustfully at a sati (chaste
woman). I do not need anything and when others look at me
negatively and get worried that I may ask them for something;
that was not acceptable. Therefore, I told everyone, ‘These

Aptavani-9

269

hands are not for taking, they are for giving; you can ask me for
anything you need.’ And this is how everyone stopped having
any kind of fear about me.
Everyday there would be several cars parked in front of
my home in Mamani Poda in Baroda. I used to pay fifteen
rupees rent for that house in a well-respected area. How many
people lived in bungalows some forty-four years ago? Mamani
Poda was considered a very good location. People normally
lived in homes paying seven rupees for rent and I was paying
fifteen rupees for our home. I was looked upon as a very
successful contractor. So those who lived in that area would
drive their cars to my home whenever they had any difficulties.
They would come to me having done something illegal and yet
I would help them escape through a ‘back-door’ (find an
underhanded solution or a loop-hole for them) solution for them.
I would show them the ‘back door’ and tell them to ‘leave’
from there. Now they were the ones who committed the crime
and I would find a way for them to escape. So I took the
responsibility (karmic) of their crime upon myself. Why is that?
It was to feed my maan! Is it not a crime to find a ‘back-door’
for others? I would use my good judgment to show them the
way out and help them escape. So they would treat me with
respect, but I was the one left to face the consequences; I
took on the liability of facing the consequences. Later I
realized that it was sheer unawareness on my part that led me
to take on the liability of such consequences and all because
of maan. That was when I recognized the maan within. What
worries it had caused me!! What anxieties I had for just
wanting maan (respect)!
Questioner: How did you destroy that maan once you
‘caught’ it?
Dadashri: Maan cannot be destroyed; it can be covered
(upsham) so that it does not hurt so much but it cannot be

270

Aptavani-9

destroyed. How can it be destroyed when the one who is
destroying it will be destroyed? How can one kill one’s own
self? Do you understand that? So I covered that maan and dealt
with it as much as I could and let the days pass.
Frightful heat of anger in reaction to
obstruction of pride
I did not have any greed from my very childhood. But I
had tremendous maan and therefore the anger that comes along
with it.
Questioner: Does that mean that you would get very
angry at the slightest interference if your maan was hurt,
restricted or obstructed?
Dadashri: Even the slightest of agitation in that respect
would incite such anger in me that people around me would
tremble with fear. That anger was so intense that it would cause
the other person to ‘burn’ also! The anger was that bad,
because there was no other greed, only the greed for this
respect (maan). Prior to Gnan, if the anger ever erupted, it
would ‘kill’ the victim on the spot. One Sikh almost died; I had
to go and pacify him in order to turn things around.
So that was the state ‘we’ were in. At home there was
hardly any money, only this superficial pompousness. And
because of that, there were endless difficulties and worries.
The Ego before and after Gnan
What would people around me say? ‘He is a very happy
man!’ I had a contract business; money flowed in and out. I had
lot of love towards people and people could see it in my eyes;
they said I was God-like. They said I was very happy! People
thought I was a happy man but I used to worry incessantly. One
day I could not sleep because I could not stop worrying. So I
‘wrapped’ my worries in a ‘package’, did a vidhi on it with
some mantras and placed it between two pillows and went off

Aptavani-9

271

to sleep and I had a good night sleep. Next morning I put that
‘package’ in the Vishvamitri River and then my worries started to
decrease. But when Gnan manifested, ‘I’ ‘saw-understood’
(joyu) and ‘knew-experienced’ (jaanyu) the entire world as it is.
Questioner: But even before Gnan you had the awareness
that it was the ego, did you not?
Dadashri: Yes, I did have that awareness. I also knew
that it was the ego, but I liked it. But it was when it bothered
me so much that I realized there was no fun in it; it was then
that I realized that the ego was not my friend but rather, my
foe.
Questioner: When did you begin to recognize the ego to
be a foe?
Dadashri: When I could not sleep at night, I realized then
what kind of an ego it was. That is why that night I ‘wrapped
the worries in a package’ and dropped it off in the Vishvamitri
River the next morning. What else could I do?
Questioner: So what did you place in the package?
Dadashri: The entire ego! The heck with it! What good
was it for me? What was it for? I had nothing to gain from it.
People would make comments about me such as, ‘there is no
end to his happiness’ whereas I could not see even a drop of
happiness in me. The ego caused me continued worries and
problems within.
The slightest jolt to the ego and I would be up all night,
unable to sleep. I would not sleep the whole nightlong. Before
when I attended weddings, if someone greeted me but I did not
see them do so, it would create chaos within me. I thought
myself to be so great! And yet there was nothing there. It would
have been different if I had some wealth in estates, but I did not
have anything. I just had pomp without the wealth. That is what
pompous people are like. And the clothes I wore, as if I was

272

Aptavani-9

a great paternal relative of the Gayakvad of the Royal Family!
Now what can be gained from all this? It eventually came ‘down
to earth’.
Questioner: Did you remain separate from the ego at
that time? Was it something like that?
Dadashri: No. This state of worries occurred because
there was no separation. That is why I could not sleep. If I were
separate at that time, would I not have been able to shut the
ego, right away?
But the ego was the only thing that was being nurtured.
Except for the ego, there was absolutely no deceit (kapat)
within; no my-ness (mamata) either. There was no mamata for
money. I did not know anything and yet I had an enormous ego.
All I knew was how to help others.
Ego of a noble man
So, I had tremendous maan. I believed myself to be
somebody great because I was born in a Kshatriya family
(warrior class family). Patels are Kshatriya, so people give them
dowries. So from the time one is born, people around him talk
about the ‘check’ (dowry) that will be forthcoming. I had
worthy attributes too. People don’t just pay dowries without a
reason. They pay for the attributes of the family lineage; they pay
for the social status. The lineage alone would not suffice, they
also look at the family and it’s prestige and honorable
upstanding. Would they give dowries otherwise? What is a
person from an honorable family like? He is noble. Noble
means he has some good family qualities. He does not cheat
anyone; he has no attributes of deceit within him. When he is
from an honorable family and good caste, then he is worthy of
a good dowry.
Now what is the definition of a noble (khandaan)
person? It is someone who ‘sheds’ readily i.e. someone who

Aptavani-9

273

gives readily when it comes to giving or taking. Like a piece of
log; it sheds wood when you pull the saw and also when you
push it. So, a noble man is very humble - he gives even in the
act of receiving; he allows himself to be cheated when he gives
to others. He gives more than he should so that the other
person does not feel hurt. So he allows himself to lose when
giving and also when he receives. Such a man is a noble
(khandaan) man.
And there is no problem with the ego of such nobility.
Such an ego will preserve nobility; one loses his nobility and
becomes morally bankrupt if such an ego is not present.
My elder brother lives here in Baroda so whenever I
visited him, his friends would ask me, ‘Bring back a pair of
pants’, or ‘bring me a vest’ or ‘bring me a shirt’. Friends do this
don’t they? And what was my nature? I would buy from the first
vendor I stopped at to inquire about the goods. Then I would
accept his prices whether they were high or low. I would buy
from him so that he would not feel hurt. Therefore, I knew my
nature and I also knew the nature of the people who asked me
to buy things for them. They would go to seven different shops,
insult the vendors while bargaining with them and then they
would make their purchases. I knew these people would buy
things even two aanaas cheaper than what I would buy for.
Therefore, I would automatically deduct two aanaas and then
one extra aanaa from the price I paid for their goods. If I paid
twelve aanaas, I would tell them I paid nine. This way they
could not accuse me of charging them a ‘commission’. They
would say, ‘I paid ten aanaas for the same thing and you are
taking your commission by charging me twelve aanaas?’ I
have never taken any commission. I have not learnt to charge
any commission.
I have never taken commission in my life. If someone
asked me for a favor - ‘Can you make arrangements for them

274

Aptavani-9

to release my goods, when you go there?’ Now that person may
have goods worth twenty-five thousand rupees. What if I were
to charge a commission of three hundred rupees or so in that?
Would he even think that I would charge a commission? Is that
why he asked me for help? No. He asked me because he
trusts me, so would I violate his trust in this way? This did not
suit me.
Questioner: But this is all natural, is it not?
Dadashri: What is natural? Can you take money this
way? Not to do so is nobility. If one does not try to preserve
this ego of nobility, in the absence of Gnan, then he will become
completely bankrupt. We are noble people! Noble people
cannot do anything wrong. Nobility is to not do anything that is
socially unacceptable. A noble person cannot do anything that
people will criticize him for. It is false nobility if a person claims
to be noble when he carries out deeds that are socially
unacceptable. No one will accept that. There is contradiction in
a situation when one claims to be noble but others criticize him;
this equation does not work.
If you do something and then say, ‘I did it,’ then the
nobility (khandaani) goes away. A noble man will give both
the times, when he comes and also when he goes. He is like
the sawdust that sheds whether you pull on the saw or you
push on it; he gives when he gives but he also gives when he
takes.
Craving for respect
Now if a person was given a lot of respect (maan) when
he was growing up, he will not be hungry for it when he grows
up. If his hunger for respect (maan) has been satisfied in his
childhood, then he has no hunger for it later on. A human life can
be destroyed if one has been scarred with contempt in his
childhood. If a person is subject to repeated insults in his
childhood to the point where his need for respect was rejected,

Aptavani-9

275

then he makes a firm inner resolution (niyanu) exclusively for
earning maan (respect). Such a person grows to be a big
maani (one perpetually hungry for respect and recognition).
From a very young age he makes a decision of, ‘now I want
to get ahead of everybody and be successful’. So he makes
this his main goal. He will say, ‘I will prove that I am better
than everybody and will go farther than everyone’, and he will
accomplish this too. Yes, he will do whatever it takes; give his
all for it and will progress further ahead. A person who has
been given a lot of maan growing up will not have this extra
drive.
Now if one receives lots of respect then his appetite for
it would be satisfied. If a person gets excessive, then his hunger
for it is fulfilled. He will then begin to dislike respect people give
him. Do you think people don’t give me enough respect? If you
too were to get such abundant respect, your appetite for it will
be finished, too.
‘Tasting’ respect releases one from having
greed for it
Do you like respect?
Questioner: Dada, up until today, I used to be intimidated
by the fear of being insulted or by losing respect. Because of this
fear I would not take part in any activities and I used to be
depressed. But now all that has gone away. As I got respect and
recognition (maan) I began to feel free.
Dadashri: No, that is lobh-granthi - a ‘tuber’ of greed
(lobh – greed. Granthi or gaanth - tuber). That is why when
one gets respect and the taste he gets out of it, will break his
tuber of greed. As he gets to taste respect, his tuber of greed
will begin to dissolve very fast.
Now if a person has a tuber of pride (maan), it will make
him run around for respect and recognition. Wherever he gets

276

Aptavani-9

respect he will be there. If they tell him, ‘We will hang a plaque
with your name on the wall’, he will say, ‘Put me down for fifty
thousand rupees.’ When a maani person gets respect he will let
go of his greed, whereas a greedy (lobhi) person will not let go
of his greed even for million times the respect. It is very difficult
to find such greedy people in this current time cycle. There is
no one as such. Such greedy people were to be found during
the third and the fourth Ara (past eras of the present cosmic
time cycle). They were very greedy. In the current time cycle
there is no telling where pride (maan) lies or where greed
(lobh) lies.
The beggary for respect
He who says, ‘I do not want anything’, his work gets
done. Even when things come before him naturally, there is no
want in him. And you, you still have needs and wants, do you
not? What do you want?
Questioner: I recognize that I want respect (maan).
Dadashri: There is no problem with wanting respect, but
are you preoccupied with attaining it? Are you caught up with
‘how can I get respect’?
Questioner: No, not that kind of preoccupation.
Dadashri: Then what if you do not get any respect?
Questioner: Then there is no problem.
Dadashri: Then there is no problem with that. If you
have an intense desire (kaamna) for respect, it is considered
beggary (bheekh). An intense desire for anything is called
beggary. Intense desire or beggary is not a (karmic) discharge.
Words like kaamna and bheekh (intense desire and beggary)
are very similar. But nothing will affect You if Your upayog,
meaning applied awareness as the Self is maintained. Therefore,
our spiritual path is not obstructed by simple pride. But it can be

Aptavani-9

277

said that the one who has beggary for respect, has deviated
from the path.
Questioner: Is it considered beggary for respect when
we feel good when someone gives us respect?
Dadashri: No. It is natural to feel good. Do you like tea
with or without sugar? It is natural to like tea with sugar. But if
someone insists, ‘I only like tea without sugar, so there!’ then I
would say that is an ego. Why don’t you quietly drink the tea
with sugar? It is tasty. Is that true or not?
Questioner: What is it called if someone likes respect?
Dadashri: There is nothing wrong in liking respect. One
is bound to like it, is one not? Go ahead and let respect be fun.
There is nothing wrong there. If someone says, ‘I cannot get rid
of my pride and need for respect’, then I will tell him, ‘If you
cannot get rid of it in this life, you can do it in the next life.’ But
enjoy your respect with leisure!
Enjoy the respect people give you but…
Enjoy the respect people give you but you should not
have any desire for it. When someone respects you, when it
lands in your plate, enjoy it. Enjoy it leisurely. But you should not
harbor a desire for it.
Questioner: But when he ‘cashes in’ the respect, will he
not have problems?
Dadashri: What is wrong with cashing in the respect?
You can cash it in, it will get used up, but the desire for it does
not arise again, does it? Enjoy the respect, I am telling you to
enjoy it. Are you going to enjoy it ‘there’? Are you going to
receive any respect in the Siddha gati (abode of the completely
liberated Souls)? So, whatever you receive here, enjoy it as
much as you can, but do not make a habit of it. Do not become
habituated.

278

Aptavani-9

Questioner: Does respect not make a person fall?
Dadashri: Rather it is the abhimaan (extra or excessive
pride) that makes one fall. So there is nothing wrong with
enjoying maan (respect) others give you, however at the same
time you should maintain the awareness of ‘this should not be
so.’ Now, ‘we’ have given you the freedom to accept respect
but you should not become attached (have raag) to those who
give you respect. There is no restriction on accepting respect but
you should not have any attachment (raag) for the one who
gives you respect.
Deceit in pride (kapat in maan): Distortion
of pride (vikruti of maan)
Questioner: Does enjoying respect not weaken the
awareness (jagruti) Dada?
Dadashri: It will definitely reduce the awareness (jagruti).
Awareness will not arise where there is deceit in pride – where
there is kapat in maan. When one’s deceit is operational in his
pride, he cannot see his pride.
Distortion of pride: Intoxication of ego (keyf)
Questioner: There is no problem in enjoying respect
(maan) that comes spontaneously and naturally. But then there
is a possibility of it becoming complex and distorted (vikruti),
and then will arise the desire for respect. Is this likely to happen?
Dadashri: Something of the sort happens but there
should not be any desire (ichchha) at all. Desire is harmful.
Questioner: What kinds of distortion (vikruti) of pride
and how far does it stretch?
Dadashri: There are many kinds of distortions of pride
and that is what makes one fall. There is nothing wrong in
enjoying respect. If someone tells you, ‘Welcome sir…welcome’,
then enjoy that respect. You will feel good inside; enjoy it with

Aptavani-9

279

leisure, but do not become intoxicated (keyf) with it. The
intoxication of pride will make it ugly. One appears ugly and
unattractive when there is such an intoxicated ego for pride.
Even a handsome face will appear ugly.
Why does pride or the need for importance exist? It exists
because one sees others as inferior. Therefore do not see others
as inferior and tell yourself that they are superior to you. Then
that pride will disappear.
You should be indebted to the one insulting
you
Questioner: Respects-insults are very bothersome, how
can I be free from them?
Dadashri: What bothers you, is it the insult (upmaan) or
the respect (maan)?
Questioner: Actually, it is the insult.
Dadashri: Even respect can be very bothersome! A man
will get up immediately if someone gives him too much respect.
If a man gets too much respect, he will run away from there. If
everyday people keep giving him a lot of respect, he will get
tired and run away from there, whereas he would not be able
to tolerate insults even for a short time. He will like respect even
for a short time. Nevertheless man can tolerate insult but he will
not be able to tolerate respect (excessive). Yes, to tolerate
respect is like swallowing lead. When a newly married man
bows at his father’s feet for blessings, the father immediately
gets up from his seat. If you ask him, ‘Why did you get up?’ He
will tell you he cannot handle it.
Questioner: And yet he does not like insult, what is that?
Dadashri: It is very wrong not to like insults. No body
likes insults. The shakti (the energy or the ability) to like insult
has not arisen in anyone. People should hire someone to insult
them, but no one does! And when people are truly insulted, they

280

Aptavani-9

get hurt and feel let down. One should be thankful to the person
insulting him but instead he feels hurt and let down. He should
not feel hurt and let down after an insult, but should feel obliged
to the person hurling the insult. If someone truly insults you,
consider him your upkari i.e. someone who does you a great
favor. You should think, ‘it would be great if he is around me all
the time.’
Love for insults
When a person insults you, he is simply a nimit
(instrumental in the process of your unfolding karmas; an
apparent doer) in the fruition of your past karma. How can that
poor man be the guilty one when you have to endure the fruits
of your own karma? So try looking at it this way. Understand
that it is a fruition of your own karma when someone insults you.
What would you do if a piece of rock were to fall from a hill
and hit you on the head?
Questioner: I would get hurt if it were in my fate.
Dadashri: No, not so. When the rock comes tumbling
down and hits you, you look up to see who threw it and when
you find no one up there, you do not get upset; you do not do
kashaya with anyone. But if someone throws a stone at you,
you will do kashaya, you get angry with him. What is the reason
behind this? It is because there is a difference in your
understanding. In the former case, the hill threw the stone at you
and in the latter, it also a ‘hill’ that throws the stone. There is no
pure consciousness (shuddha chetan) in a person; it is
mishrachetan (a mixture of the non-Self and the Self; the
worldly being). He too is a ‘rock’; he is a ‘hill’, the poor
fellow! If you ‘see’ and ‘understand’ it this way, then it is more
than enough.
You cannot love insults, can you? You cannot love insults
as much as respect, can you? Can a person like losses as much
as he likes profits?

Aptavani-9

281

Education and wisdom
What would you do if someone were to insult you? What
‘we’ are saying is where you do not have any authority and the
power (satta) to change anything; you simply have to say ‘I like
it’. What do you have to do when you have no energy (shakti)
or control? If you say ‘I do not like it’, it will gnaw away at you
from within. It will eat away at you all nightlong, do you
understand? Has this ever happened to you?
Questioner: It will bite and bother me the whole
nightlong; it feels like I am being beaten!
Dadashri: Alas! Just look at the way people spend their
days! Education is bhanatar. Reasoning ability, wisdom is
ganatar. Educated people will reduce their upadhi (externally
induced difficulties and pains). If they can, they will completely
get rid of their difficulties (upadhis); they will leave nothing
pending. But if a person is not able to do anything, he becomes
entangled. Educated people who do not have a reasoning power
(ganatar) will get entangled; they have education (bhanatar)
but they do not have the wisdom of reasoning (ganatar).
Reasoning is a different thing. I have not learnt education
(bhanatar) but I did learn very good reasoning (ganatar). I
failed my matriculation grade but I have tremendous reasoning
energy and wisdom (ganatar).
Pratikraman for the attack
Questioner: What should I do when I do not like being
insulted?
Dadashri: No problem with that, but you do not attack
(humlo) the person who insults you, do you?
Questioner: Attacking speech does come out; the attack
is done through words.
Dadashri: But that is not your inner intent (bhaav), is it?
Questioner: Absolutely not! I feel bad after speaking

282

Aptavani-9

such words. But when such words do come out, does it not
mean both internal and external asaiyam (expression of
kashaya) has occurred? There is no benefit in that is there?
Dadashri: The first saiyam (absence of kashayas) within
is, ‘No. This should not be so. Why does this happen?’ That is
the first saiyam. However, this saiyam must commence. This
verily is the true saiyam. Then the last saiyam will come
gradually.
Questioner: Sometimes when I am insulted in such a
manner, the attack of the mind continues, although it may not
manifest in speech.
Dadashri: We are not concerned with whatever happens
at that time. Even if it ends up in a physical attack, the worldly
interaction (vyavahar) is dependant upon whatever energy
(shakti) exists within. The one in whom the shakti has
manifested completely, his attack from even the mind will cease.
Still what do ‘we’ say? You simply have to do pratikraman if an
attack from the mind or speech occurs, or even if a physical
attack occurs. Do pratikraman if the weakness of all three kinds
of attacks arises.
Questioner: Say if someone insults me and my pride is
hurt so badly that a tragu (state of severe obstinacy) arises
within me, but only against myself, how far will I fall? In other
words, I do not follow your instructions about how to deal with
the insult.
Dadashri: One has already fallen, has he not? The fact
that obstinacy arises is the fall in itself. Severe obstinacy (tragu)
is the greatest danger. One has fallen completely; he cannot go
down any further.
The fear of being insulted is beggary
(bheekh) of pride
What do ‘we’ say? It is not a problem if you do not like

Aptavani-9

283

being insulted but you should not harbor beggary or a desire
for respect.
Questioner: But do we not have to get rid of this
weakness of fearing insults?
Dadashri: That will go down, as you get insulted.
Whatever you have dished out will be returned. The problem
lies in being a beggar for respect.
Questioner: What does it mean to be constantly
preoccupied (laksha) with the feeling of not wanting to be
insulted?
Dadashri: Such a laksha where one is constantly
concerned about not being insulted is verily beggary for respect.
Otherwise, charitra mohaniya (conduct with moha; attachment
to the relative self) is a discharge moha; it will come and go. The
Self has nothing to do with it.
The Soul and respect or insult
Therefore, respect and disrespect is all the beggary of the
pudgal – the physical or the relative self. If someone were to
slap ‘us’, ‘we’ do not have any problem with that.
Questioner: All these talks about respect and insults,
who is the one that becomes aware of it; it is not the body, it
is the soul, the self, is it not?
Dadashri: The Atma (the Self) does not have respect or
disrespect. The Self is not a beggar that it has anything to do
with respect or disrespect. The Self is the King of the entire
universe; it is the Lord of the Universe.
Questioner: But when that reaches within, is it not the
soul that gets hurt?
Dadashri: No, it does not hurt the Soul (Atma); it does
not touch the Soul, the Self at all.

284

Aptavani-9

Questioner: The body is the non-Self (anatma), what
effects do respect-insults have on the non-Self?
Dadashri: What happens when you touch a block of ice
with a flame? Will the flame scorch the ice?
Questioner: It will not scorch it, but it will melt the ice.
Dadashri: On the contrary, its cooling attribute cools that
flame. Similarly, pain and misery do not touch the Self. They do
not affect even the body or the Self.
Questioner: Then what does it affect?
Dadashri: Who is the one that endures the suffering? It
is the ego! It is the ego that suffers. Nothing touches the Self.
The Self does not accept anything that is not of its own.
How can anyone insult You when he does
not even know You?
What happens if someone were to insult Chandulal? He
will not be able to sleep at night, will he? It will keep bothering
him from within. The person who insulted him sleeps peacefully
while Chandulal feels the hurt and will not be able to sleep.
What kind of weakness is it that does not let you sleep when
someone insults you? Why should You not sleep just because
someone insulted you? And besides, it is not You that was
insulted, it is someone else. If they insulted You, you should not
tolerate it, but he did not insult ‘You’, so why fret over it?
Someone else is being insulted and You take it personally. You
should not take it as ‘I am being insulted’, should You? Yes,
nobody should insult You, but no one will insult You either. How
can they when they do not even know You? They know
Chandulal but not You.
When you regard the person insulting you as someone
who obliges you; then your desire for respect (maan) will end.
Who is to be insulted? ‘Ambalal Muljibhai’ (reader to insert

Aptavani-9

285

their names here – the relative self); ‘Insult him as much as you
want. What relation do I have with him? He is ‘our’ neighbor.’
If he is hurt and cries, I will pacify him.
But the poor man will not get any sleep because he
believes ‘I am insulted’. Otherwise, there is tremendous energy
(shakti) in each and every Indian. All they need is someone to
awaken it for them. Still, look at how helpless people have
become? Wherever you look, you see them standing in queues.
That is how helpless they have become. Otherwise, what were
these people like? If they felt a slightest shun in an invitation, they
would refuse to go. But look at them now! They drag
themselves everywhere and stand in lines. If you ask them,
‘Why are you waiting in a line?’ They will say, ‘We have to
take a bus.’ Why do you have to go by bus everyday? Do you
not know how to find an alternative and an independent way of
going? They will ask, ‘What other way can I find when I have
to work?’ So the whole life is fractured. Otherwise, in the past
they would not go to anyone’s home for dinner if they felt the
slightest of insult. They paid too much importance to insults.
So ‘our’ intention is to give people such knowledge that
wherever they go, whichever countries they visit, no one can
depress them; no one will be able to depress them. Any one
who causes depression to others will become depressed
himself. This is for sure. No matter how important the other
person is or even the whole world for that matter, how can
anyone shake us?
Nevertheless, if the fear of being insulted goes away in a
person, who is not Self-realized, then that person will become
shameless (naffat). People have some sense of shame due to
this fear of being insulted. Would they have any bounds
otherwise? And for the one who is Self-realized, when the fear
of being insulted goes away, he becomes liberated. Here, in our
satsang, you will be liberated if your fear of insult goes away.

286

Aptavani-9

Maya: the illusion and her progeny of six sons
Is everyone not concerned about respect and disrespect?
Questioner: But Dada, has this not been the case from
the very beginning?
Dadashri: This is the same old stock from endless time.
The phenomenon of respect and insults begins from the time one
enters the human life form. There is nothing like this in other life
forms; it is only here in the human life form and the celestial life
form that there is a lot of it.
Questioner: Does one forget about respect-insult when
he goes into another life form?
Dadashri: He forgets. He forgets the moment he leaves
from here, he does not remember. Do you remember what you
ate four days ago?
Questioner: No. Why does an embodied soul (jiva)
‘remember’ vengeance-enmity (vair-zair), respect-insults (maanupmaan) and forgets all this?
Dadashri: No, he does not remember even that. He only
‘remembers’ anger-pride-deceit-greed. These four remain
constantly as sangnya (subtle inner association). Vengeance and
enmity occur later on. That does not come into one’s memory
(yaad). The moment one is insulted, he starts yelling. What do
you call those sweets children eat?
Questioner: Peppermint.
Dadashri: Now if this young girl and boy were to take
some peppermint from here, the greedy one (lobhio) of the two
will take more. From that we will know which of the two is
greedy. A greedy person will be recognized. A greedy person
is always the first one in line.
Questioner: Man should confront all his difficulties
peacefully, but that does not happen. So what should he do?

Aptavani-9

287

Dadashri: How can he confront his problems when there
is weakness of anger-pride-deceit-greed within him? Anger
does not stand-alone. It always accompanies the enemy called
pride (maan). Anger is there to protect maan. Therefore, as
long as there is a presence of pride there will also be a presence
of its bodyguard, anger, for sure.
Questioner: So does that mean that one has to learn to
tolerate insults?
Dadashri: The energy (shakti) to tolerate will come
when one’s pride (maan) goes away; anger is the bodyguard of
pride. Pride has employed a bodyguard and told him to teach
a lesson to anyone who comes to insult. Greed (lobh) also has
employed a bodyguard; it is deceit (kapat) – that verily is
maya itself. That maya will go away when greed (lobh) goes
away. Anger is the bodyguard of pride. If someone tells you,
‘Are you a fool? Don’t you have any sense?’ you should tell
him, ‘Sir, this is not something new; I have always been like
this.’
People try to fight their anger do they not? Some try to
fight their pride. But what does maya (illusion) say? It says, ‘I
have six sons: krodha-maan-maya (kapat)-lobh-raag and
dwesh (anger-pride-deceit-greed-attachment and abhorrence)
and I am the seventh. No one except a Gnani Purush has been
able to wipe out my family till today. No matter how much you
destroy my anger and greed, as long as my son, pride (maan)
is alive; everyone will become alive again.’
The Gnani Purush kills maya’s (illusion’s) son named
pride (maan); He does not actually kill him, he does not even
evict him from his seat. He simply changes the seat for him. If
the Gnani were to kill pride, then he would be guilty of himsa
(violence). The word ‘kill’ implies himsa. There cannot be any
himsa. He will not beat the ego.

288

Aptavani-9

The growing pride gives rise to greed
Questioner: From the kashayas of sexuality-angerillusion-greed and pride (kaam-krodha-moha-lobh and mada
or maan respectively), which one is the worst?
Dadashri: Pride (mada) is the worst.
Questioner: Why is pride the worst? Is greed not the
worst?
Dadashri: Should we not look at what supports all the
other kashayas? It is based on pride (mada, maan). Nothing
would stick around if that support were not there.
Questioner: Then what is mada?
Dadashri: What do they call a baby elephant?
Questioner: Madaniyu (mada-niyu).
Dadashri: That is it.
Questioner: All these things can be brought under
control, but not greed (lobh), correct?
Dadashri: But if the one having greed is brought under
control, then everything will automatically come under control,
will it not? Have I ever told anyone to get rid of his greed? I
catch the one responsible for greed and throw him off his throne
and then everything collapses! As soon as the king is killed, his
army scatters away. When there is talk amongst the soldiers
about the king dying, none of them will stay to fight. Therefore,
the king has to be captured, that is all. If there is mada (pride)
then there will be greed (lobh), otherwise there will not be any
greed, will there? Greed will not remain if mada (pride) leaves.
Those who are poor do not have any greed do they? There is
no pride so where is the greed?
Pride, verily is himsak-bhaav
Anger-pride-deceit-greed (krodha-maan-maya-lobh) are

Aptavani-9

289

verily himsak-bhaav (violent intent); it is all considered himsa
indeed. Deceit (kapat) is a major himsa. Maya here means
deceit (kapat). Maya is also used for illusion as well; it is that
which veils the Soul (the Self). Anger is overt himsa; it is open
violence.
Questioner: You said that there is himsak bhaav
(violent intent) in kashaya (anger-pride-deceit-greed), so please
explain what kind of himsak bhaav is inherent in pride (maan)?
Dadashri: Pride itself is himsak bhaav (violent intent).
The one with pride does himsa towards others, however, if that
other person has any self-interest or feels he may benefit or gain
personally, then he will put up with the person who has pride.
But how does one generally feel about proud people? Anger is
always associated with pride; there is always contempt in it.
Pride means contempt (tiraskar)! The aura of ‘I am something!’
leads to contempt (tiraskar) for others. Pride is verily contempt.
An abhimaani - a person that has pride with ‘my-ness’
(mamata), will be even more contemptuous.
A man with pride (maani) is different. A person with
pride with ‘my-ness’ (abhimaan) is different. A tundmijaji is
different and a ghemraji is different.
There are countless phases of pride
There are many phases of pride and there are words for
each phase of maan.
Questioner: Tundmijaji, ghamand, are these some of
the phases?
Dadashri: Yes. Those are all different words. People
have their own understanding and meaning of different words.
For example, people have their own understanding of the words
garva (doer-ship) and garavata (to wallow in worldly
indulgence). Some people even refer to abhimaan (pride with
‘my-ness’), as garva. What is the definition of ahamkar (ego),

290

Aptavani-9

what is abhimaan, what is maan (pride), what is garva and
what is tumakhi?
Questioner: What is the meaning of khumari?
Dadashri: Khumari is a kind of abhimaan – excessive
pride. These are different types of abhimaan. Then there is the
word ghamandi! A ghamandi is someone who has no
substance but will make claims such as ‘I can defeat even the
lawyer’s father!’ You should realize that he is a ghamandi – a
fake show-off. There are all kinds of people with all kinds of
baggage. Then a machharayelo is someone whose bite stings
like a mosquito. Then people also say, ‘that man has a lot of
ghemraji.’ These are all different phases of pride and that is
why they have been given different names.
Questioner: But all these different phases of pride such
as abhimaan, ghamand etc., do they not manifest after a
certain age? A young child does not have any of these
kashayas.
Dadashri: A child does not have them at all. But as the
intellect increases, so do the kashayas and their consequences.
So the phases of these words are very immense. It is very
difficult to understand these phases. You can only know them
from a Gnani Purush.
Questioner: Please explain them individually.
Dadashri: If you call out to a laborer passing by, ‘Hey
you! What is your name?’ he will reply, ‘Lalvo’. Now he did not
call himself, ‘Lallubhai’, so you should realize that he has only
the ego (ahamkar). (‘Lalvo’ is a nickname for Lallu and ‘-bhai’
is a formality like ‘Mr.’)
If we ask another person his name and he says
‘Lallubhai’, you should realize that, he is also a maani (he has
an ego as well as pride. He called himself Lallu with ‘bhai’
attached at the end).

Aptavani-9

291

If he answers, ‘I am Lallubhai, the lawyer, did you not
recognize me?’ you can say he also has abhimaan (pride with
‘my-ness’).
So these are all its traits.
Abhimaan arises when ahamkar associates with mamata,
i.e. when the ego associates with ‘my-ness’. This ‘my-ness’ can
be of any kind. When the ego is by itself, without ‘my-ness’
(mamata), it is called simply ego (ahamkar).
Questioner: Then there is the word tundmijaji? What is
the definition of that?
Dadashri: Tundmijaji! This is a person who does not
have any understanding or money and yet he has endless
arrogance (mijaj). He cannot even get married (no body will
have him!) ‘Why are you being so arrogant when you can’t even
get married?’ That is called tundmijaji.
Then we have a tumakhi. Some seventy-five years ago
the collectors, police, D.S.P. (District Superintendent of Police)
all had tumakhi - as if they were God. They used to beat up
prominent businessmen. What tumakhi! I witnessed that not too
long ago. Because of my business as a contractor, I had to meet
with these officers and so I have seen these traits in them. In a
train, a person could not sit in front of a collector in the first
class. They were honest and disciplined but they had infinite
tumakhi. What tumakhi! They petrified people. An executive
engineer, who used to come to our business, would create a
very intense situation. He would do as he pleased because he
had authority.
I have seen such tumakhi, but now it makes me laugh
when I look at these collectors. In the past they displayed such
authority with arrogance, as if they were God visiting offices. But
today these very people walk around with slippers and if you
accidentally step on their toes, they say ‘please! please!’

292

Aptavani-9

whereas before if someone were to do the same to them, they
would hit that person with a ‘hunter’ (leather cane), but today
they are reduced to being subservient. They have straightened
up after a lot of beating. Their arrogance- tumakhi has gone
down. Before a person could not utter even a word to these
collectors on the train but look how they have mellowed from
all the beatings. Now they will tell you, ‘Yes, it is fine. It will do.’
They even succumb to their wives, ‘Yes, yes it will do.’ Before
they would never say, ‘It will do’ and now?
They have calmed down considerably. Today people can
criticize prominent people without any repercussions. See how
they have mellowed and straightened up. They are going to
straighten up more with further beating.
Questioner: Next, what are the qualities of a ghemraji?
Dadashri: What does ghemraji mean?
Questioner: Does it mean ghamand?
Dadashri: No, ghamand is different and ghemraji is
different. People are very shrewd. Up to a certain point there is
ghamand and if it goes beyond this point then we call it
ghemraji. It becomes distinctive the moment there is a change
in intensity. People are very smart.
Ghemraji is someone who boasts and brags. He will say,
‘I can go all over the world,’ when he can’t even travel three
miles. People needlessly walk around boasting and bragging like
this. It is all in their mind but there are people who bring them
down to earth. People will openly make comments about them
‘he is a ghamandi or ghemraji.’ ‘He has abhimaan.’ People
will comment this way.
What is a ghemraji? A ghemraji is someone who snubs
people wherever he goes, ‘move away from here!’ We can tell
him, ‘Arey! Let me sit for a while!’ but he will not let you sit;
he will ask you to move. Such people do not value anyone. To

Aptavani-9

293

them everyone appears to be like animals. Now tell me, such
are the ghemrajis. Where do you think this word came from?
Is it a Persian word?
Questioner: This is the vintage native Charotari (district
in the state of Gujarat) language.
Dadashri: Yes, Charotari (Gujarati dialect) languagebhasha. People will comment, ‘so and so is very ghemraji. He
has nothing and yet he is a ghemraji.’ Is this not in our Gujarati
language? Now where did this word come from? What is its
root cause? I am looking but I cannot find it. I can find the root
cause of abhimaan and all that.
Questioner: So these words are not as simple as they
seem. There is a deep hidden meaning in them.
Dadashri: Yes. These words are full of meanings. One
should not define them superficially. There is an absolute
meaning (parmarth) within but this can only be realized when
many layers are discarded.
Questioner: You said, ‘There was a lot of ego (Dada
had a lot of ego before Gnan)’, so did you experience all these
phases through that ego?
Dadashri: Yes. I experienced them from all the sides. I
also saw their ‘perspective view’ (three dimensional) too. I
could ‘see’ what the ‘perspective’ ego looks like.
Questioner: What does it look like?
Dadashri: I recognize it. I recognize its front elevation,
back elevation; a perspective view. I would know from all these
views. I can see what ‘Dada’ looks like in back elevation, in
front elevation and from the perspective view. I can see and
know what the nose looks like.
Questioner: The nose is part of the body but what do
the phases of the ego look like?

294

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: I can see the ego in the same way too. Once
you see that perspective of the body, then you will see that of
the ego too. The ego will melt but these are ‘body parts’ and
they are dependent upon the body.
Questioner: What do you mean by ‘body parts’?
Dadashri: If a person has a small nose, his ego is small
too and if his nose is big, his ego is big. Therefore, however it
is with the body, it is the same with the ego.
‘Hum’ (‘I-ness’ with ego) is an obstacle on
the path to moksha
Questioner: What is the difference between ahamkar
and ego?
Dadashri: They are the same thing.
Questioner: When one says, ‘Hum’, is that also an ego
(ahamkar)?
Dadashri: ‘Hum’ is different and ego is different.
Generally it is considered that wife and children are major
obstacles in attaining liberation. Are these the only things that
hinder liberation? There are many other things that hinder one’s
liberation. How do the poor wife and children hinder him? They
sleep in their own beds so how are they a hindrance to you?
Do they get inside your stomach and go to sleep? If they did
then you can consider them a hindrance, but is that what they
do? Each sleeps in his or her own bed, so where is the
problem for you?
But this ‘hum’ ego gets into your stomach and hinders by
saying, ‘hum, hum, hum?’ This ‘I am something, I am
something,’ does not go away, it will go wherever one goes.
Have you ever seen this ‘hum’? It is not visible. But from its
trait you will know, ‘here comes the ‘hum’; you can see it in
the eyes.’

Aptavani-9

295

One is free from everything except the ‘hum’, and this
‘hum’ is very wrong. Instead it would be better to have two
wives; at least his ‘I am something’ (the hum) would go away.
Would that not happen when the wife curses or insults him? But
who will curse this useless bull-like man when he lives by
himself? When he does not have a wife and never comes under
anyone’s control, the ‘hum’ will increase. In addition he has
countless inner spiritual blocks (atkan).
One does not create ego; it is something that is natural to
one’s being. It is there. One is caught in the forces of
circumstances. Ego is nothing but a wrong belief and so one can
become free from it. Whereas this ‘hum-I am something’ is a
different thing. I have seen all those ‘hums’. When one keeps
saying, ‘hum’ ‘hum’. I know what is going to become of him.
I will immediately know what seat he has reserved for himself
(rebirth in a lower life form). Would I not know that?
Questioner: So is this ‘hum-I am someone great’ a
strong ego?
Dadashri: No, ‘hum’ does not touch the ego. The ego
may subside but the ‘hum’ will not.
‘Hum’ will do whatever it chooses. These poor policemen
do not have ‘hum’ of this kind. The ego will subside if you
reason with it or coax it, but this ‘hum’ is a completely different
thing. The ‘hum’ of worldly people will leave after it takes a
beating.
Questioner: Is this ‘hum’ connected with adhyas (the
constant belief of I am the body)?
Dadashri: Adhyas? No. This is all considered adhyas
but ‘hum’ surpasses even adhyas. The belief of ‘I am the
body,’ is a different thing. But you cannot deal with the belief of
‘hum’. The poor body is naïve and so is anger-pride-deceitgreed. But there is nothing like ‘hum’ in this world because it is
automatically born on its own when there is nothing there.

296

Aptavani-9

I would recognize a person with ‘hum’. He has a certain
sound just as a counterfeit coin has a certain sound. Have you
ever seen a counterfeit coin?
Questioner: Certain people with ‘hum-I am something
great’ that walk around are recognizable, are they not?
Dadashri: No. ‘I am something’ is a different thing.
Those people around you with ‘I am something’ are people
living a worldly life. Their ‘hum’ will go away sooner or later.
As soon as they experience any suffering, their ‘hum’ goes
away. But who will get rid of ‘hum’ in those others (so called
ascetics)? That ‘hum’ is then taken into ‘sohum’ (I am that)!
Questioner: Does a person have some quality in order
for this ‘hum’ to arise? Does he have any substance?
Dadashri: What substance? They have nothing. Hum
arises because how is one to live otherwise? What is the basis
of his existence? He exists on this ‘hum’. Before his living was
based on material things and now he lives on ‘hum’. Even
though he is alone, he gets food to eat and water to drink
because of his merit karma (punya). He gets to eat and drink
and his ‘hum’ will continue to increase. He claims, ‘Just look
what I get! I get everything. There is nothing that I cannot get.’
Yes! We agree that you get everything you want, but how can
you know where you are getting them from? Then when your
‘hum’ gets bigger and stronger, who will remove it for you?
Questioner: So how can one get rid of the ‘hum’?
Dadashri: Is ‘hum’ ever likely to go away? How can
‘hum’ go away? How can that which one created himself ever
go away? The ego will go but not the ‘hum’. The definition of
ego (ahamkar) is to claim to be at a place where one is not.
Such ego can go away. One does not do anything and yet he
claims to be the doer; that is ahamkar. Whereas, he himself has
given birth to ‘hum’, so how can it leave? The ‘hum…hum’
continues.

Aptavani-9

297

Questioner: Does that ‘hum’ ever go away; is there any
solution for it?
Dadashri: There is no solution for it. He will go to a
lower life form and take continuous beating there. That is where
the ‘hum’ will be crushed.
When does ‘hum’ sprout? It starts when he becomes
bankrupt everywhere. What then does he live on? Then comes
this hum of ‘my Grandfather was so and so…’ Thus begins the
hum.
Hum—‘I am something great’ is born when there is
nothing there. Whereas the condition that gave rise to the ego is
still there. Now, when does the ego go down? It goes down
when a thug mugs him and takes away his clothes, that is when
his ego will go away!
Questioner: Is this discussion for those who are not Selfrealized?
Dadashri: It is for the one who is not Self-realized. In
Gnan, there is no ego. The ego does not decrease or leave in
the one who has ego (those who are not Self-realized). Such a
person will encounter people who will increase his ego. The ego
will decrease from incidents such as if someone were to rob him
or beat him up or even if he incurs a loss of 1.5 million rupees
when his income is only a million rupees.
Questioner: But then the ego will go in another corner,
will it not?
Dadashri: No, it will go down; it will not increase. Ego
and mamata (‘my-ness’) are naturally attained things; they are not
created. This hum of ‘I am something great’ is a created thing.
Ego, pride and pride with ‘my-ness’
(ahamkar, maan and abhimaan)
Questioner: What is the difference between ego

298

Aptavani-9

(ahamkar), pride (maan) and pride with ‘my-ness’ (abhimaan)?
Dadashri: The extended form of ego is called pride
(maan) and if it is associated with ‘my-ness’ (mamata), then it
is called abhimaan. When there is even the slightest of
mamata, one will say things like, ‘this is my car.’ Why does a
person show people his car? It is because of his abhimaan. If
he has good-looking children, he will say, ‘Wait till I show you
my four children.’ That is mamata and abhimaan. So where
there is abhimaan he will keep showing you such things. And
pride (maan) is an extended form of the ego.
Questioner: Is abhimaan born out of maan?
Dadashri: No. When is abhimaan born? It is born when
‘my-ness’ (mamata) is present.
Ego (ahamkar) is a different state and abhimaan is a
different state. People have no awareness of this whatsoever
and yet they go around using inappropriate words; they say
whatever comes to their mind. They will say, ‘He is an
abhimaani man, he is ahamkari man.’ Every human being is
ahamkari; there is not a single person who is not. Only the
Gnani and his followers are not ahamkari, everyone else is.
What is ego (ahamkar)? It is to claim to be something
you are not. One does not know who he really is and he claims
to be what he is not. That is ego. So to whom does this
statement apply? It applies to everyone; everyone is considered
ahamkari. Ego implies independence. It does not depend on
any other thing. What is his belief? He believes to be what he
is not. The ‘I’ (the real Self) is not Chandulal but he believes ‘I
am Chandulal’ and that is ego (ahamkar)! Therefore, if one is
‘Shuddhatma (the pure soul)’, then there is no ego. There is ego
in ‘I am Chandulal’. Then, ‘I am this lady’s husband’, is another
ego. Then, ‘I am this child’s father’, is a third ego. So how many
different forms of egos are there? Then even if he does not have

Aptavani-9

299

abhimaan (ego with ‘my-ness’) about his home, people will still
say that this is his ego.
It is not wrong to have an ego. Ego is just to claim to be
what one is not. That is the only error of the ego, nothing more.
Now what is maan (pride)? It is when one wears nice
clothes but rolls up his sleeves so that people can see a threethousand-rupee watch on his wrist. Then when someone asks,
‘How are you sheth?’ you can clearly see his pride. Maan is
“ego with rich materials”. He will wear expensive clothes,
jewels, etc. That is maan.
Questioner: What is the difference between an ahamkari
and a maani person?
Dadashri: An ahamkari (egotistic) person does not
have any fear of being insulted (upmaan) whereas a maani
(person with pride) does. If a person has pride (maan) then
he will be affected by insults (upmaan), but what if he has no
pride?
Questioner: But when his ego is broken, will he not feel
insulted?
Dadashri: No that is simply called breaking the ego. But
only if there is maan, there will be upmaan.
What is abhimaan (pride with ‘my-ness’)? If a person
has possessions, he will tell others about them; that is what we
call abhimaan. Everyone does this; people cannot refrain from
telling others about their possessions. But when is it considered
abhimaan? The ego is there for sure but suppose you are going
to a shop and you are in hurry, someone you know stops you,
you ask him, ‘What is it? I am in a hurry’, he will say, ‘These
are my homes, these two buildings and those two buildings are
mine.’ That is called abhimaan. ‘Why are you telling me now,
I have to go. Why are you bothering me?’ But he is showing
abhimaan. He will tell you how good something is even when

300

Aptavani-9

you do not ask. What is the reason behind it? He has that
abhimaan. It is a different matter if you had asked him, but if
he tells you without being asked, it is abhimaan. When he is
itching to tell you, it is abhimaan.
Questioner: Is it because of abhimaan one says, ‘Mine
is higher (better) than his?’
Dadashri: Yes, it is because of abhimaan. Abhimaan
means he gives examples of ‘this is better, this is mine’. This is
my property; that is my property, this is my car etc.’ so based
on this he is trying to say that his is better than others’. He does
not say it directly. Abhimaan is when one has more than what
is necessary and makes a show of it. He believes, ‘How happy
I am.’ Thus he tries to make others feel inferior. This is
abhimaan.
So an abhimaani will show off all his possessions, he will
even show you his expensive eyeglasses he bought. He will say,
‘Did you see my glasses?’ What am I going to do with your
glasses that you keep showing them to me? But he does it to
feed his abhimaan. He will also show off his clothes or the
shoes he bought. That is abhimaan.
He will go so far as to show off his son-in-law if he is
educated and good-looking. He will tell you, ‘Come and see my
son-in-law.’ What is so special about your son-in-law? Everyone
has one, what is there to see? But he will say, ‘No, you have
to meet my son-in-law.’ Then when you tell him ‘you have found
yourself a good son-in-law. What a good looking man!’ he is
satisfied. Then he will also take you out to dinner. He will say,
‘You have to dine with us today. You cannot leave without
having something to eat.’
Abhimaan means to exhibit pride (maan) wherever one
can. Even if his brother’s house is small, he will show it to you,
‘This is my brother’s house, this is my uncle’s house and that is
my house.’ Whenever he tries to show anything big, that is

Aptavani-9

301

abhimaan. His abhimaan (pride with ‘my-ness’) is at work
there. Abhimaan is to show off your possession in order to
impress others. Why does he show off? For pride - maan!
When he goes beyond maan, he will not be satisfied even with
abhimaan. Nature will sort him out by punishing him and then
he will get back on track. Just because you have four cars, you
should not have any ego or abhimaan about it. If one exhibits
abhimaan, it is the beginning of departure of the very things he
has abhimaan over. One should maintain humbleness. As you
begin to acquire worldly comforts, you should maintain
humility.
When a man claims ‘I have four sons, this son is a
Chartered Accountant, etc.,’ it is all abhimaan. ‘I am fair
skinned, I am slim…, all that is abhimaan too. ‘I am fairer than
other people; they have a dark complexion’, all that is
abhimaan. Do people not have pride (mada) because of their
looks?
Questioner: Yes they do.
Dadashri: If someone has a beautiful wife, he has mada
(pride) of, ‘There is no one like my wife.’ Does that happen or
not?
Questioner: Yes it does.
Dadashri: Now, this beauty is not going to remain the
same. It does not take long for this beauty to become ugly.
What will happen to that beauty when the face becomes
covered with small pox blisters? Would the beauty remain with
the scars of pockmarks even if the face used to be very
beautiful? Is any of this under our control? Therefore, one
should not have an ego about beauty. ‘There is no one better
looking than me,’ is abhimaan—pride with ‘my-ness’. So when
someone says, ‘I am fair’ it is not considered ego. It is
abhimaan. People have no understanding at all of what ego is.
A person with abhimaan is easily recognized.

302

Aptavani-9

Questioner: This abhimaan is clearly visible when they
take a group picture.
Dadashri: Yes. The photographer can also see that a
person is affected with the abhimaan. But photographers will
take my pictures the moment they see me because they do not
see any abhimaan (ego) in me. A person with the abhimaan
will stiffen up this way or that way, whereas I remain natural.
Questioner: Is abhimaan not like the ego (ahamkar)?
Dadashri: No, ego is better. It can be removed.
However, abhimaan causes tremendous misery. What is the job
of nature? Nature’s job is to reduce abhimaan. As soon as
abhimaan increases in a person, he will be brought down with
a beating. There is no problem with ego (ahamkar).
What is the difference between abhimaan and ego? ‘I am
Chandulal’, is ego (ahamkar). To claim to be where one is not,
is ego and to show off, ‘this is my bungalow, this is my car etc.’
is abhimaan. If that is the case, then why don’t you show
people your grey hair? ‘Look I have grey hair’ but nowadays
people dye their hair black instead. Ego has arisen out of
ignorance and abhimaan has arisen with understanding. When
a person takes garva (pride here), ‘Look at this, look at my
estate,’ we should recognize that abhimaan is rising.
If someone here were to sing a song and it pleases
everyone and so he sings two or three more songs; that is
abhimaan.
Do you understand now what abhimaan is? It is to
believe the weight of the non-Self (pudgal) to be ‘your own’
weight. You have gold, jewelry, expensive watches, house, car
etc., these are all non-Self weights and to believe those weights
to be your own weight is abhimaan. A person may believe the
weight of his bungalow to be his weight. People consider it an
ego when someone brags about his home, they will call him
ahamkari, but it is not ego; it is abhimaan. The material

Aptavani-9

303

possessions are there, but to claim them as yours and to enjoy
the taste that results from displaying them, is abhimaan. The
taste of abhimaan can be very sweet. Pleasure arises within, the
moment he says, ‘These are my homes.’ Then it becomes a
habit for him, like going to the Havmor ice cream parlor.
Questioner: You had once said that the whole world is
trapped in ‘Havmor’ (brand name for ice-cream).
Dadashri: In ‘Havmor’! I do not need this Havmor and
therefore I am not trapped by it, nevertheless I will eat icecream if someone offers me some. That (the pursuit of pleasure)
is the aim of worldly people and for me such aim is meaningless.
My goal is different.
Havmor becomes a habit for people because of ajagruti
(unawareness); they do not have the awareness of its benefits
versus harm. When can one become habituated? When he is not
aware of what is right and what is wrong. If someone feeds me
ice-cream everyday, I would not even remember (think of) it the
next day. I would not miss it for a second, even if he feeds me
ice cream everyday for months and then stops suddenly. I would
give compliments and say, ‘the ice-cream is very good’ I would
say this, but superfluously! If the ice cream were to continue
giving its sweet taste after it is gone, then I would accept that it
is a good thing. After we finish eating it, no matter how much we
say, ‘give me more taste’, it will not, will it? So what is the use
of such a taste? Many people become so engrossed in the taste
that as their portion of the ice cream gets smaller; they leave it
longer in their mouth and savor it for as long as they can. What
happens when only the last bite is left? After you swallow it, the
taste will no longer be there.
Do you now understand what abhimaan is and what
ahamkar is?
Questioner: And when one attains saiyam, (absence of
kashaya) will his abhimaan not increase too?

304

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: There is no abhimaan where there is saiyam
(absence of kashaya). Abhimaan is blind and where there is
saiyam, you will not find abhimaan. Not only abhimaan but
you will not find ego (ahamkar) there either.
The zero state of the Gnani Purush
‘We’ are allowed to have abhimaan about attaining the
status of the Lord of the whole universe and yet ‘we’ have less
abhimaan than even a young child. ‘We’ do not have an ego
ahamkar at all. ‘We’ would not be able to attain all this if ‘we’
had ego. The one who has no ownership of the body, the mind,
the speech; he becomes the owner of the entire universe.
Questioner: But some people say that one can often see
abhimaan in a Gnani Purush. How can that be?
Dadashri: Where there is abhimaan, there is no Gnan,
and where there is Gnan, there cannot be any abhimaan.
Questioner: Does that mean that Gnan and abhimaan
cannot co-exist?
Dadashri: Gnan and abhimaan can never co-exist.
There is either Gnan or abhimaan. If you see abhimaan when
you slap the ‘Gnani’, then that is ignorance (agnan) and you will
clearly see that he cannot be a Gnani.
Yes, until ‘we’ attained Gnan, deh-abhimaan (abhimaan
of ‘I am this body’) existed. It increased, as I grew older. When
I was born it was about 25% but as I grew up, it increased
150%! It used to gnaw at me even when it was about 25% so
do you think it did not bite me more as it increased? When it
bites or gnaws at you, it is abhimaan and when there is
internal suffering, it is the ahamkar ego. Abhimaan is a
constant gnawing.
Instead of just mere ego, I had abhimaan (pride with
‘my-ness’). I was also a tundmijaji (someone who does not

Aptavani-9

305

have any understanding, no money and yet he has endless
arrogance) and some even used to say that I had lot of
ghemraji (such people do not value anyone). I did not have
Gnan at that time, but because I had collected baggage (karmic)
of such high quality from my past life, I felt that I was somebody.
I knew that and consequently had ghemraji about it.
I have awareness of what the ego (ahamkar) should be
and what abhimaan should be. Today you cannot find a person
with only ego (ahamkar); there is always some degree of
perversion of the ego and for sure it has progressed to the stage
of abhimaan.
A person with ego only is considered spontaneous and
natural. It is a natural ego but such a person is not to be found
in this current time cycle. Where can one find such an ‘ego only’
person? Today we have people with abhimaan. What is ego?
It is the belief, ‘I am Chandulal’, but that is a natural state and
he is not at fault for having this belief. But what is abhimaan?
When someone says, ‘see this bungalow of mine, see this
hospital of mine, see this factory of mine’ then realize what is
talking; his abhimaan is talking.
Questioner: But you said that your abhimaan had
increased, then how did it go down to zero?
Dadashri: All of a sudden! I did not do anything. ‘This
is but natural’; it occurred naturally. That is why I tell people
they should not try to imitate this. What are you going to do
when it is a natural phenomenon? Now come to me and I will
show you the way. I have found a path. But if you try to follow
the path that I took to get to this stage, you will die, because my
abhimaan had gone from 25% to 150%, and I could not bear
it. Only I know how I managed to pass those days!
Questioner: There is a saying, ‘one had abhimaan
worth a quarter of a pound. As he became learned it increased

306

Aptavani-9

four times and when he became a guru, it increased forty times.’
Now the only thing of importance is how one can come down
to the level of zero.
Dadashri: Now after attaining Gnan, where is your
purusharth (independent spiritual endeavor) of day and night
taking you? This purusharth is taking you towards zero. What
was the case before? It used to increase three fold, and it was
headed in the direction of growth. Now You are headed
towards its dissolution. So it is futile to look for solutions here.
Everything here is very systematic. You are headed towards the
‘zero state’, and that state will come for sure.
After Self-realization…
After attaining Gnan, you have no ego at all. What is the
definition of ego? To decide and believe, ‘I am Chandulal’ is
ego (ahamkar). Now you have doubt over the knowledge of
‘I am Chandulal’. So now that you are not Chandulal, but the
pure Soul (Shuddhatma), you do not have ego. ‘You’ are
egoless.
Questioner: So you consider ‘I am Chandulal’ as the
ego?
Dadashri: Yes, that is called ego (ahamkar).
Questioner: That ego part is gone, but does our
abhimaan still remain?
Dadashri: Yes, but there is no problem with abhimaan.
It is a discharge (nikali). You do not have ego left at all. There
is no problem with abhimaan. Maan and abhimaan are a
discharge. Then beyond this there is garva (doer-ship) and
other things. The main ego is gone but the effect of that ego
remains, does it not? The root cause is gone but the branches
still remain, however they will eventually dry up.
Questioner: So is abhimaan the result of the old ego?

Aptavani-9

307

Dadashri: Yes, abhimaan is a result of the ego. That
result remains but the root cause is gone. The ego is gone.
Kevalgnan (absolute enlightenment) occurs when all the results
of the ego go away.
Questioner: But abhimaan is a result of the ego, so
does kevalgnan come when abhimaan goes away?
Dadashri: No, abhimaan is not the only result of ego;
there are many other results too. One achieves kevalgnan when
they are all gone.
Questioner: Then what are the other results of the ego
(ahamkar)?
Dadashri: There are many different kinds of results.
Questioner: What should we do so that our abhimaan
does not cause anyone any difficulty and makes them happy
instead?
Dadashri: All you have to do is have such an inner intent,
nothing else. Your intent should be, ‘My abhimaan should not
hurt anyone but it should make them happy.’ And if someone
still gets hurt, then do pratikraman and move on. What else can
you do? Do you have to sit there the whole night? You cannot
sit there even if you want to, so what can you do?
Nevertheless you should proceed in a way that it does not
hurt anyone.
Questioner: Is the worldly life not supported by the
result of the ego, ‘I am Chandulal’?
Dadashri: But that ego is gone after attaining this Gnan.
If the ego remained it would continue to produce results, would
it not? New results do not arise after attaining this Gnan. The old
ones will dissipate; only the old ones will dissipate. So then the
problem is solved. The karmic ‘tank’ does not refill. One person
may have a fifty-gallon tank; another may have a tank of twenty-

308

Aptavani-9

five hundred thousand gallons! The bigger the tank the longer it
takes to empty out, but it is emptying all the same. So what does
it matter for the one whose tank is emptying?
Questioner: But while it is emptying, it will sweep one
away like the floodwaters; it will topple someone and it will hurt
someone.
Dadashri: Yes, but all those are ‘his’ consequences; it is
a result. What do You have to do with that? However, you
should do pratikraman for it if someone gets hurt in the process.

Swamaan and ego with rich material
Questioner: What is the difference between maan
(pride) and swamaan (pride within limits)?
Dadashri: Maan means ‘ego with rich materials’ (materials
attached through ‘my’ or ‘mine’ with the ego) and swamaan is
confined to having pride over one’s own qualities; it is
associated with one’s own personal attributes, such as, ‘I am a
graduate’ – that is the extent of his pride. That is pride within
limits; that is swamaan. He asks to be recognized for what he
has achieved and nothing more. When that is violated he feels,
‘Why are they doing this when I am a graduate?’ so his
expectations are confined to him being a graduate. He considers
it important for him and so you should not violate that. You
should not violate someone’s swamaan (pride within limits).
And what is maan? In maan one is not concerned
whether he has a degree or any specific qualification. In fact,
forget about qualification; it is ‘ego with rich materials’. He
wears a long coat (fancy clothes), a three-thousand dollar
watch, gold frame glasses, that is maan!
Questioner: What is the difference between hurting
one’s ego ahamkar and hurting one’s swamaan?
Dadashri: A lot! The one whose swamaan is hurt will
bind vengeance (vair).

Aptavani-9

309

Questioner: So one would not avenge his ego getting
hurt?
Dadashri: No, nothing. There is no problem with the
ego. But the wealthy do not have an ego; only the poor have
an ego. If a person remains unaffected when you say to him,
‘Come along you useless person!’; it is so because there is
only the ego ahamkar. Still it is not always like that. It may or
may not affect his ego but wealthy people do not have just the
ego alone.
Questioner: Then what do the wealthy people have?
Dadashri: They have pride maan, abhimaan, swamaan;
they have all these different things. They have everything else
along with the ego. And the poor do not have any thing; all they
have is the ego.
Questioner: A person will have abhimaan if he does
something good, but what if he becomes proud about humiliating
someone?
Dadashri: That is not considered abhimaan.
Questioner: So then what is the difference between the
two?
Dadashri: Maan and abhimaan both are with rich
material.
Questioner: So are maan and abhimaan connected to
material wealth?
Dadashri: Yes, nothing else.
Swamaan
Questioner: What is the difference between swamaan
and abhimaan?
Dadashri: Swamaan, what kind of pride is that? It is
one, which maintains, ‘no one must instigate me or shake my

310

Aptavani-9

tranquility’, it is confined to only this. He keeps only this much
pride so that no one can irritate him. Abhimaan is when a
person will say, ‘The property of my bungalow starts from here
and it goes all the way up that line. And you haven’t even seen
what is behind it.’ Then he shows off all the jewelry he bought
for his daughter. He does that to feed his abhimaan. He will
show you all the real estate he owns, ‘these 200 acres belong
to me’. He will keep looking in the mirror to see how goodlooking he is. When people talk about their grandfather and
family lineage and how great it is, that is abhimaan; that is not
swamaan.
A person with swamaan is involved in a worldly
exchange of give and take. Swamaan is to respect others and
be respected in return. Therefore, to respect people is a worldly
interaction of the worldly life. You have to make do with things
to the point where you do not violate anyone’s swamaan. For
us all, having attained this path of liberation, we are not
concerned with swamaan. But we do have to accept swamaan
as a necessary thing for worldly interactions, otherwise, one is
considered shameless. In the non-realized state (agnan) one
should have swamaan. Should one at least not maintain this
boundary? How can you cross that boundary? Swamaan is the
protection one employs to insulate oneself from insult.
Swamaan is a great thing. It is the limit of a positive
attribute of a non-Self-realized state. I have praised swamaan
a lot in a sense that it is the limit of positive attribute of a nonself-realized state. Are there not positive attributes of a non-selfrealized state? This is the limit of it.
Questioner: Is swamaan a pardonable or not?
Dadashri: If one has taken Gnan, then swamaan is
pardonable. Even otherwise one should maintain swamaan.
Even in the absence of Self-realization, one should have
swamaan. If a person does not have swamaan, he will become

Aptavani-9

311

shameless and brazen. Once that happens, he crosses the
boundary.
Questioner: But is there a part of the ego in swamaan?
Dadashri: Let it be; there is ego there for sure but at
least he will not become shameless. Because of the swamaan,
he will remain within the boundary; he will never cross that line.
Therefore swamaan is needed even in worldly interaction in the
absence of Self-realization.
Questioner: Now everyone has swamaan. So should
we not keep ours too?
Dadashri: Why should You keep your swamaan now
that You have attained this Gnan? Now there is no swamaan.
Questioner: But under certain circumstances if something
happens, should we not maintain our swamaan?
Dadashri: But now we all have nothing to do with
swamaan. Pride and limits of pride are all gone. It is like this,
if the ‘swa’ (the self) has not changed, then one must maintain
swamaan. Chandulal has to maintain his boundaries swamaan,
not You. Now, for you the ‘swa’ has changed. The self is no
longer Chandulal. You are the Self. Do you understand this?
Questioner: But should one not keep a ‘dramatic’
swamaan?
Dadashri: That will be there. Whatever there is, it is
good. But there is no need to keep swamaan. Why would you
want to start such new business?
Swamaan means ‘I am Chandulal’ and to maintain the
boundary of that pride and respect. But that is as long as you
are ‘Chandulal’, and now that You are a Shuddhatma, where is
the need for such a discussion? After this Gnan, one has become
the Self. Then where is the place for swamaan? Swamaan is
the pride of ‘I am Chandulal; I am the body’. But now that

312

Aptavani-9

‘You’ are the ‘Self’, there does not remain any swamaan.
Whatever swamaan there is, it is a discharge. And we are not
concerned with that which is a discharge.

Abhimaan and false abhimaan
Questioner: What is the difference between abhimaan
and mithyabhimaan (false abhimaan)?
Dadashri: Abhimaan is when one shows off his
possessions where as mithya-abhimaan is when one does not
have anything; not even food to eat but he still goes around
telling people, ‘We have so many comforts’; have you not seen
such people? Mithya-abhimaan means to show false pride and
boast without having anything to show for it; it means to brag
unnecessarily. Whereas people know that, ‘as an abhimaani he
has wealth and he is being ostentatious. He has something to
show for his abhimaan, although he should not be abhimaani.
He should not boast about his wealth.’ Abhimaani means
people will always give him more respect because he is wealthy.
But when he brags about his wealth, they are put off and think
‘why did you have to say that? We may give you a lot of
importance but all you have to do is to listen!’
That is false abhimaan (mithya-abhimaan)
Questioner: Can you please give an example of false
abhimaan?
Dadashri: What is false abhimaan? It is when a person
has nothing and yet he brags, ‘I have lot of wealth’; that is false
abhimaan.
One Patel from our village was sitting with a nice man
from another village on a train. The man asked, ‘Uncle, where
are you going?’ Our Patel said, ‘I am going to Bhadran.’ When
the man asked, ‘How long are you going for?’ he responded, ‘I
am going only for ten to twelve days but it will take two days
just to have our home cleaned.’ The man said, ‘It takes only two

Aptavani-9

313

or three hours to clean a house, does it not?’ Patel told him, ‘It
may take two to four days just to clean the lower floor. Then
the second and the third floor will need to be cleaned. There
are bathrooms and other things that need cleaning also. There
might be about hundred to hundred fifty mattresses which will
need to be dusted.’ He started to brag this way and the other
man just kept listening. This is how the Patel kept painting the
picture.
Then his wife came to me and said, ‘Look Dada, this is
what he was telling the man on the train.’ Then her husband tells
me, ‘I was talking to that man and telling him all this and she
ruined my reputation. She told him not to believe me because
we had nothing of the sort. You cannot believe this but I was
trying to build a reputation for myself. I was trying to gain
respect and she goes and destroys it!’ How was this going to
build his reputation? Whose reputation was going to increase?
What nonsense is this? This is false abhimaan. You live as a
renter and you talk so big!
People even rent the clothes they wear and then they go
around saying, ‘I have two bungalows with gardens and a farm’
His jacket may be well ironed but it is rented. Your jacket may
be at the laundry for cleaning but the laundry man will have
rented it out to this man! Then you end up wearing the jacket
someone else wore. So look at the world! Then you brag that
you do not wear hand-me-down-clothes! This is how the world
works. I have seen all this. You may even recognize that the
other man was wearing a jacket just like yours. It even had a
stain in the same place as your jacket has. But what can you say
to that man? That is how this world is.
The sting of mustard seeds
What is the saying people use? They say, ‘Your head is
full of mustard seeds (rai).’ Yes some say mustard seeds and
others say potatoes!

314

Aptavani-9

Questioner: Dada, why do they say mustard seeds?
Dadashri: Because whenever he says anything, it stings!
He will say something and it will give you a migraine!
Questioner: Everyone has ‘mustard seeds’ in their heads
for sure.
Dadashri: Is that so? Is that true? Mustard is cheap in
Gujarat, is it not? That is why people eat it. Has the ‘mustard’
gone away from your head or not?
Questioner: Yes, it has gone.
Dadashri: Since it is gone, everything is resolved.
Questioner: Does the expression ‘filled with mustard’
mean that a person has more abhimaan?
Dadashri: Those with abhimaan are different and those
with ‘mustard seeds’ are different. One with mustard seeds does
not have any wealth. There is nothing to be proud of and yet his
head is full of mustard seeds. Who can be an abhimaani? It is
someone who owns large homes; someone who has wealth to
show for it. Those who have some real estate can be
abhimaani. What is the point of filling your head with mustard
seeds when all you have is an apartment of ten-twenty thousand
rupees? It is acceptable for a person to have abhimaan when
his wealth is not affected regardless of what rules and regulations
the government imposes.
People have a right to be proud of their possessions like
a car or a flat etc., but there is no reason to be abhimaani.
Even if you have a lot of real estate, what will you gain by
abhimaan? On the contrary, your possession went away, did it
not? Besides when a person has abhimaan, his crown will be
one of thorns. There is no telling when someone will come to
attack you and that is why it is better if you don’t wear the
crown. It is only recently that people have started to call their
living quarters ‘my flat’ otherwise they used to call them ‘nests’

Aptavani-9

315

– a nest of a sparrow and pigeon. But here even if a person has
a one-room kitchen, they call it ‘diwan khanu’ (prime minister’s
living room).
The thermometer to measure pride
Questioner: Do people not have pride for things other
than material possessions? Saints and ascetics do not have any
material possessions and yet they have tremendous pride. What
kind of pride is that?
Dadashri: They have pride about knowing the scriptures.
But this too is a kind of a wealth, is it not? ‘I know all the
scriptures’, is that not wealth too? These are all considered
materials. It is all maan.
Questioner: It is also possible for a person to have pride
(maan) even when he knows nothing?
Dadashri: Yes, that happens because that is what he
believes. If a person does not accept the respect people give
him, even in his mind, he starts believing that he has overcome
his pride. He may think to himself that he has no maan left in
him because he is not affected by the respect people give him;
he does not accept it from within either. Furthermore, he
behaves in such a way that he does not offend anyone. He
knows in his mind that the level of the ‘mercury’ of the gauge
that measures his pride does not rise (i.e. he does not become
flattered from within) and therefore he has no pride left.
Otherwise would the level not rise, if someone were to give
him lot of importance? If people give him importance and he
accepts it (swells up with pride) is that not considered an
increase in the level?
So the level will not rise if he does not internally accept
the respect people give him. So then I ask him, ‘You do not
have any maan left, have you? Now check with that
‘thermometer’ (gauge) to see whether the fever goes up or

316

Aptavani-9

down?’ He asks me ‘What thermometer?’ I tell him, ‘If there
are fifteen or twenty relatives of yours sitting here and someone
tells you, ‘you have no sense’, that comment will affect you, so
where did it all go? I thought you said you do not have any
maan left! There is no maan like that of an insult (upmaan). All
other forms of pride have no significance but there is no pride
like the effect of an insult. He who cannot bear an insult is a
proud person (maani). A person can accept respect people
give him but he cannot bear an insult. Such a person is
considered the biggest maani. I have all kinds of
‘thermometers’. I employ these thermometers whenever
someone comes along. A ‘thermometer’ is such a thing that
you will know immediately.
People build castles in the air like Shekhchalli. He started
day dreaming because of a cooking pot; ‘I will get married, I
will do this, I will do that.’ A mere cooking pot gave rise to his
entire worldly life, did it not? ‘I will bring a lamb. I will bring this.
I will bring that and I will get married. Then I will have a son.
Then he will come to call me, ‘Dad, come and have dinner.’ But
what I do is I topple over people’s ‘pots’ and bring them down
to earth so that everything will vanish in the air. Once the pot
topples over nothing will remain, right? Hence, I would quickly
topple over his pot and so his ‘marriage, wife, son, lamb etc.,’
will have no basis. What else can I do? However, people are
not at fault here either.
Therefore, people have come to merely believe and
accept certain things in this way. The ascetics too have come to
believe certain things without any reason. Not all ascetics are
bad; there are many good ones. By good I mean, if you call
them ‘Bapji…bapji…(call them with respect), they will be
happy. They do not care for money; they do not care about sex
or any worldly pleasures. If you call them ‘Bapji’, they are
happy, but in their mind they believe, ‘I do not have any duality
in me anymore. I am beyond all duality.’ But just a single word

Aptavani-9

317

of disrespect will set them off. When just one word sets you off,
what will you do when the whole load falls on you and you have
to deal with it? It takes just one word to tear you apart. Say if
you add 5 pounds of salt in 100 gallons of milk, the milk has the
capacity to absorb it; it will not curdle up. But here with just one
word, you fall apart!

Nirmaani: the ego of being pride-less
There are many ‘saints’ who walk around claiming to be
‘nirmaani’ (free from wanting maan i.e. free from wanting
respect and importance). This will not work in religion. Have
you ever seen a nirmaani person? A nirmaani person can be
considered nirahamkari, can he not?
Questioner: Yes, ego-free.
Dadashri: Be careful; do not ever say that. People, who
are nirmaani, have the ego of being nirmaani (free from
wanting maan). They have the ego of, ‘I am a nirmaani’. And
proud people (maani) have the ego of maan. The ego of a
proud man is better, but in which lifetime will a nirmaani get rid
of his ego of being nirmaani? The ego of not having pride is a
subtle ego, once you have it; it is very hard to get rid of. Such
a nirmaani will keep telling everyone, ‘I am nirmaani … I am
nirmaani.’ There is a subtle ego behind that. Gross ego is better
because even other people will tell you that you have so much
ego that you walk around with an inflated chest. Would people
say that or not? But in the other case, there is no one to tell him
so – no one to tell him off, so his ego will continue to grow day
by day. That is why I have to say this directly to such nirmaani
people, ‘understand this otherwise you will end up wandering
around. You will have to become ego-free (nirahamkari). Just
being nirmaani alone will not do.’ Do you understand what
nirmaani means?
When I give you Gnan, you become nirahamkari (egofree). It is a big ego to be a nirmaani. Alas! That lafru

318

Aptavani-9

(something that possess a person) is very big. This lafru of
maan i.e. wanting importance and recognition is better; it is
docile. Someone will come and tell you, ‘why are you walking
around with your chest inflated?’ Will people not comment this
way? You yourself may comment to a maani, ‘Even I don’t
walk around with inflated chest when I am working, so why are
you?’ But no one will make a comment or say anything to a
nirmaani. The state of a nirmaani is a state of subtle ego.
What does this mean? It means his external ‘horns’ have been
cut off but his internal ones still remain. Neither external nor
internal ‘horns’ are acceptable. Internal horns will create an
internal sting but he does not hurt anyone externally, does he?
For him everything on the outside is clean and proper. His
servants take out the bedbugs and mosquitoes for him, so he
does not have anything bothering him on the outside and
neither does he have any external problems or afflictions. But
how will the inner stinging leave him alone? The inner stinging
is more intense. Have you ever seen or experienced inner
stinging?
Questioner: I have seen it and experienced it too.
Dadashri: So one will have to become ego-free, being
nirmaani alone will not do.

Nirmohi: the ego of being without attraction
or infatuation
Questioner: Dada then there is another word ‘nirmohi’
that needs clarification.
Dadashri: Nirmohi is not a complete word. Nirmohi
does not mean that one is completely without attachment. We
cannot use the word nirmohi for a person whose illusion has
gone away completely. Therefore, nirmohi is not a state of the
end of his illusion (moha). We can use the word anasakta,
which means free from fascination or infatuation, but we cannot
use the word nirmohi. Where is the word nirmohi applicable?

Aptavani-9

319

It is applicable to a person who pushes away his attraction
(moha) through his ego; we can call him nirmohi. This means
that the ego itself is still present but he has reduced everything
else. If someone insults him or swears at him, he will say,
‘What is it to me?’ But his ego still remains. His ego of being
nirmaani or nirmohi remains. Will this ego not have to be
removed in the end?
The Gnani can get rid of the ego of a maani. However,
the ego of not being proud in a nirmaani is so subtle that even
the Lord cannot remove it. If such an ego were to arise within
you, it will destroy you. So ask someone before you do anything
along these lines.
That is why Krupadudev has written, ‘why does one not
attain liberation?’ Then He said it is not greed or any such
problems but if maan were not there, one would attain liberation
here and now!
This is written to give encouragement to people; a
viewpoint is stated. It is correct. It is to show those who do not
have Self-realization that everything else will be overlooked but
one must not lose his focus of his maan. Maan (pride) is the
cause of the worldly life.
Sat Purush is he who…
Krupadudev has said that a Sat Purush is the one who has
continuous focused awareness (upayog) of the Self. Therefore,
the one, who never misses his upayog, not even for a second,
is called Sat Purush. Then it is the one whose speech is not
found in scriptures; it is a speech that has never been heard
before and it is a speech that gives experience. His words can
create new scriptures. A person can achieve liberation if he
hears just one word of the one who has a constant awareness
as the Self, day and night. Because His speech has vachanbud
i.e. it has energy and power in it. He does not have any inner
desires whatsoever; such non-visible is His conduct. There are

320

Aptavani-9

infinite other such virtues besides these. That is where you can
find a Sat Purush.
Krupadudev has gone as far as writing:
“Sansar kevad ashata mai che…ek ansha shata thi
karine poorna kamta soodhi ni sarva samadhi tenu sat
purush je kaaran che”
‘The worldly life is filled with nothing but ashata suffering… underlying the phenomena in which, from the point of
a fraction of easiness (shata) to the entire expression of the state
of eternal bliss, lies the exclusive cause (kaaran), and that cause
is a Sat Purush. Despite having amazing prowess and capability,
he has no spruha (acquisitiveness or inclination of anything), no
relative sense of accomplishment (unmattata), no sense of ‘Iness’ (potapanu), no doer-ship (garva), no indulgence in
worldly comforts (garavata); to such an awe inspiring Sat
Purush, I reminisce over and over again and I bow.’

Nispruha: non-acquisitiveness; no inclination
Questioner: When Shrimad Rajchandra says that the Sat
Purush has no spruha - in what regard?
Dadashri: Shrimad Rajchandra said ‘there is no spruha
(no inclination)’. Many people in India are nispruhi (nonacquisitive) so are these people acceptable? No these nispruhi
people will not do. There are countless such people.
All hermits, ascetics etc., are nispruhis; complete nispruhi.
They reject everything; they are non-acquisitive in worldly
matters. Such ascetics claim in scornful tones, ‘What do I care?
I do not need anything.’ People bring them milk thinking, ‘Bapji
(the ascetic) will be pleased and he will be helpful to me some
day. Besides my son does not have any children.’ The ascetic
on the other hand responds, ‘I do not need anything. Go away
from here, why did you come?’ he also curses at them. But
people are greedy and so the ascetic’s work gets done. And

Aptavani-9

321

there is the principle of vyavasthit. People bring them food and
drink even if they call them names and curse them. The
ascetics survive this way. It is the principle of vyavasthit so it
will not fail to provide them with food and drink. People also
comment, ‘the man is crazy but what great renunciation! Let’s
take him some food.’ They will bring him food even if he
curses them. Now when one says, ‘I do not want anything,’
that too is considered a spruha (inclination). That too is an ego
of ‘not wanting anything’. Have you ever seen such nispruhi
men? I have.
One such nispruhi had come to me. He showed me his
padlock. He had made a hole through his penis and put a lock
through it. He removed his clothes and told me, ‘Look!’ You
fool! Why do you have to put a lock on a sense organ? What
crime did the organ commit that you are putting a lock on it? I
did not have Gnan in those days, so I was strong and biased and
one-sided. I asked him, ‘Why are you here? Why are you doing
this? Why are you showing me this?’ So he tells me, ‘I have put
on a lock, can’t you see it?’ I told him, ‘I do see it. Why did
you put it only in one place? Why not put it over here too?’ He
retorted, ‘Why do you talk to me like this?’ I asked him, ‘so
what do you want from me?’ He says, ‘Give me five rupees
right now.’ I told him, ‘I do not have any rupees if you threaten
me, but I do have money if you were to ask me for it. I have
all the money that you ask for but I do not have any money for
your threats. My guru has told me to give to anyone who
requests it but not to anyone who demands it from me.’ So he
became belligerent, ‘I am going to do this to you! I am going to
take care of you!’ I told him, ‘You are a big man. You can do
whatever you choose. I have nothing so what am I capable of
doing? And the money I have is for those who ask with
humility’ He then said, ‘Is there nothing for me?’ So I told him,
‘Take one rupee.’ He did not say anything right away and as
he started to walk out of the gate I invited him back and

322

Aptavani-9

served him some tea and gave him five more rupees. Then he
did not say anything more.
So these nispruhi people go around saying, ‘What is it to
me…what is it to me…?’ They end up wandering life after life
and they take others on the same path. And what is a Gnani
Purush like? He has spruha i.e. he has acquisitiveness and
inclination for the Self in you and is interested in your salvation.
He is nispruha – non-acquisitive and non-inclined - in your
worldly matters. He does not want anything worldly. His only
inclination (spruha) is how salvation can be attained for all. Yet,
he is not completely without inclination (nispruha). This means
‘we’, the Gnani Purush is nispruha-saspruha; which is a state
of being non-acquisitive towards the non-Self, and acquisitive of
the Self. What does this mean? Neither that shore nor this shore;
neither at the shore of the non-Self nor at the shore of the
absolute Self – that is where ‘we’ are at. Therefore, ‘we’ are
nispruha towards your relative self and saspruha towards your
real Self. Therefore even if you were to swear at ‘us’ or insult
us, ‘we’ keep spruha (inclination) for You. ‘We’ place an inner
protection even for the unfortunate person that does wrong by
‘us’. Do you understand?
No complacency (unmattata) in the Gnani
What is another attribute of the Sat Purush?
Questioner: There is no unmattata, meaning an
overflowing sense of satisfaction and inflated pride, in the Gnani.
Dadashri: Yes. What is unmattata? Do you understand
this? I will explain it to you in your language.
What kind of an ego do people have? If we see a person
passing by, he walks in a straightforward manner. He is
spontaneous, natural and is walking along in a very orderly
fashion. As he passes by again we notice a change in him. His
face has a different expression; he appears smug and self-

Aptavani-9

323

satisfied. We can see that the man has changed; there has been
an ‘effect’ on him of some kind.
So we say to him, ‘Come in, come and have some tea.’
We offer him tea, not for his air of superiority but to inquire into
his changed disposition. He believes we are offering him tea
because of his superior stand. We give him tea and ask him,
‘Where did you go?’ He will reply smugly, ‘I needed to collect
the five thousand rupees from him, now I have them.’ He gets
five thousand rupees in his pocket and he becomes self-satisfied
(unmattata). He now has the disease of swelling with pride unmattata. So the ‘eggplant’ becomes ‘tight’, otherwise the
‘eggplant’ becomes limp.
Now if a person has unmattata with just five thousand
rupees, then as far as the Gnani Purush is concerned, the Lord
of three worlds is pleased with Him. So tell me, how much
‘unmattata’ will He be in? And yet there is none. Is that not a
wonder? But no, that is precisely where true laghuta - smaller
than the smallest, lies. ‘We’ are like a little child.
…no potapanu (‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’)
Then what is the third sentence Shrimad Rajchandra
writes?
Questioner: There is no potapanu (no sense of ‘I-ness’
and ‘my-ness’).
Dadashri: Potapanu means ‘I am this and this is mine.’
What does ‘no potapanu’ mean? This body is not mine. This
body verily is not mine, so all that belongs to the body is not
mine. This mind (mun) is not mine. This speech is not mine.
This speech that is being spoken is not ‘my speech’. This
is the ‘original taped record’ that is speaking. He (Ambalal) is
the speaker (vakta). You are the listener (shrota) ‘I’ am the
knower-seer (gnata-drashta). This is the interaction (vyavahar)
of these three. ‘We’ are not the owner of the speech. ‘We’ are

324

Aptavani-9

not the owner of the body. ‘We’ are not the owner of the mind.
The sweetness of doer-ship (garva
meethash) is the cause of worldly life
Questioner: What is garva? Is there a difference
between garva and abhimaan (pride with ‘my-ness’)?
Dadashri: What happens when you place garva and
abhimaan on the opposite sides of the scale? Do they weigh the
same? Abhimaan will be a quarter of a pound and garva will
be forty pounds.
Questioner: How is that, can you please explain that?
Dadashri: People do not understand abhimaan or
garva. Abhimaan is different, garva is different and ahamkar
is different.
Questioner: So does garva mean ‘I-ness’ (hoonpad)?
Dadashri: No, the ‘I-ness’ (hoonpad) is ego. ‘I am
Chandulal’ is ego. At times you may or may not have
abhimaan, you may not even have garva. Hoonpad (I-ness) is
to believe to be where you are not. Those who are not in the
swapad (the Self), are in the hoonpad.
But what is garvaras? Garvaras is very sticky.
Abhimaan is mild and docile in comparison. It is very light,
whereas garva is very heavy.
Questioner: Can you explain garvaras with an example?
Dadashri: In abhimaan one does not have the sense ‘I
am the doer of all this.’ In garvaras he believes ‘I am the doer’.
So being the doer in one thing, he also believes he is the doer
in the entire universe. So garvaras extends very far and wide.
Does anyone do garva? There is garva in everything. The
sense of, ‘I am doing’ is all garva.
When the awareness of ‘I am doing’ went away for

Aptavani-9

325

Krupadudev, he attained right vision (samkit) and he sang,
‘Mityon udayakarma no garva re (The sense of doer-ship in
the fruition of karma is gone)’. The whole world is in garva
(doer-ship) of fruition of the karma. There is no exception to
that. This is because as long as one has not attained the Self,
he is verily elsewhere (in the non-Self), and therefore garva
(doer-ship) remains.
Why did egoism creep in, in the first place? It is because
of ignorance. Ignorance of what? Ignorance about who the doer
is in all this. That is why Narsinh Mehta said:
‘Hoon Karoo, hoon Karoo eyj agnanta,
Shakata no bhaar jeym shwan taaney,
Shrushti mandaan chhe sarva eni perey,
Jogi Jogeshwara kok jaaney!’
‘I am the doer, I am the doer, is verily the ignorance,
It is like the dog believing, ‘I am pulling the cart
(which the bullocks are pulling),
Everything in the universe goes on, on its own,
This is known by the rare yogi or the fully enlightened
One’
Is Narsinh Mehta saying anything wrong? Many people
claim, ‘I did this, I did swadhyaya – religious study, I did
penance, I did chants etc.’ so what is the truth? ‘I am the doer.
I am the doer’ is ignorance so how can man proceed further?
And what is garva? It is when one takes credit of doing
something, when in fact he is not the doer of anything. He does
not do anything, things just happen. But what do people claim
instead?
Questioner: ‘I did it.’
Dadashri: That is called garva.

326

Aptavani-9

Questioner: Can it be said that one can have garva of
Gnan?
Dadashri: We can accept garva of Gnan because it is
something good. But this is garva of ignorance.
Questioner: Garva is also used in a positive way; for
example one says, ‘this is something worth taking garva for.’
Dadashri: There it is used in a positive way. But the main
garva of the world is here (doer-ship). They have taken it to
denote something good.
Garva means to believe ‘I am the doer’, when in fact one
is not the doer. And when a person takes credit for doing, it
creates ‘sweetness’ (garvaras) within him and so he gets
enjoyment out of ‘doing’; he gets sweetness in claiming ‘I did it’.
Questioner: And the circumstances around him are such
that people reinforce it by further accolades and respect, in the
form of garlands, complimentary letters etc, to the nimit, by
saying, ‘you are the one who did it, what a great job!’
Dadashri: Yes they latch on to him by saying, ‘You are
the one who did it; you did it!’
Some people take garva for doing something good for
others. They even take garva for doing something bad. A
person will take garva for killing someone great and famous or
take garva of making others rich. He would say, ‘I have made
quite a few millionaires.’ That is not call swamaan (pride within
limits) or abhimaan (pride with ‘my-ness)’.
Sometimes it is hard to find good paan (mouth freshener
made from beetle nut leaf) but if someone manages to find one,
he will tell you three times, ‘It was not available anywhere, but
I got it.’ That is garvaras. He will tell you, ‘I went out and
looked for it everywhere. I found it otherwise you would not
have been able to enjoy it.’ He takes garvaras in this. He
enjoys it very much.

Aptavani-9

327

Questioner: It is wrong to take garva, is it not?
Dadashri: The worldly life is based on garva (doership). The seed for the worldly life is garva, not ego.
Questioner: How is garva a seed?
Dadashri: There is no sweetness in the ego (ahamkar).
The ego offers no enjoyment but garvaras (doer-ship), is very
sweet! Pride and abhimaan have some sweetness also but not
as much as garvaras. There is nothing as tasteful as garvaras.
Only ‘Science’ will liberate you from garva
So we are not the real doers, some other entity is the
doer. One makes false claims of doer-ship (arop); he makes the
aropit bhaav of ‘I am doing this.’ Then he gets to taste the juice
of doer-ship (garvaras), which tastes very sweet, and that
binds karma. You bind karma the moment you take false pride
and taste the sweetness of doing something,
However, one can be liberated if he knows the reality
exactly as it is; that is if he knows that he is not the doer but
vyavasthit is. One should have such a science (Vignan) within.
Then there will be absolutely no attachment (raag) or abhorrence
(dwesh), will there? He will be able to realize through this
Vignan ‘I am not this (the body).’ All this knowledge that I am
talking of is not my Vignan (science); it is the Vignan of the
Vitarags, the Vignan of the twenty-four tirthankaras. How can
one attain the Self without this Vitarag Vignan and see it as it is?
Questioner: According to your ‘theory’, it is vyavasthit
that runs everything nevertheless garvaras continues to occur
within, does it not?
Dadashri: No, garva will not occur. Garva only occurs,
as long as you have decided, ‘I am Chandulal’. There is garva
as long as this wrong belief exists. Once this wrong belief leaves,
garva will not remain.

328

Aptavani-9

Questioner: But that wrong belief does not go away that
easily does it?
Dadashri: The wrong belief does go away for sure.
‘We’ remove it for you. There are many people whose wrong
belief has gone and there is not just one wrong belief; ‘I am
his brother, his uncle, etc’ there are so many such wrong
beliefs.
Questioner: But that wrong belief does not go away until
You make us realize the Self (swaroop), does it?
Dadashri: No, it will not. That awareness (bhan) has to
be attained. The awareness ‘I am not Chandulal, Chandulal is
just for the worldly drama,’ has to occur. Then saiyam (the state
without kashaya) will prevail within. One will not taste
garvaras when inner saiyam prevails, he will not take delight in
the sweetness of the juice of doer-ship. So much bliss of saiyam
arises that one has no need to taste garvaras. One takes
garvaras because he has no inner bliss. When such bliss is not
there, there is at least the sweetness of garvaras.
The Gnani has no garva (doer-ship)
Indulging in garvaras will continue to increase keyf
(intoxication) of ego. Then one becomes very intoxicated. How
will this keyf come down? How will the intoxication of the
illusion (moha) that has risen come down? In life, the profits that
come are mandatory (farajiyat) and so are the losses. But
when a person makes a profit, he claims, ‘I earned it.’ And
when he incurs a loss, he says, ‘God did it’ or ‘my stars are not
favorable.’
One wants to taste the sweetness of the garvaras and
that is the cause of the worldly life. The worldly life is not
perpetuated by drinking alcohol, smoking cigarettes or drinking
tea. It is this garvaras that perpetuates the worldly life.
Garvaras is the only thing that no one likes to get rid of.

Aptavani-9

329

What does garva mean? I will explain this to you. When
someone tells you he did four samayiks (introspective meditation),
you will see great happiness on his face. Then if you ask him
how many samayik some other person did, he will tell you, ‘He
cannot do samayik. He did only one’. If you ask him, ‘You do
four samayiks?’ he will respond, ‘Then who else? I am the one
who did them.’ That is when we realize how intoxicated he is
with the sense of doer-ship (keyf of garvaras)! He may have
all kinds of notions of greatness. Then if you ask him the next
day ‘How many samayiks did you do today?’ he will tell you
he could not do any because his legs were hurting or he had a
headache. So did he do the samayik yesterday or his legs?
Who did it? If you did the samayik then do not use your legs
as an excuse. You were able to do a samayik because your legs
were fine and your head or your stomach was not hurting you.
When everything is regular and the circumstances are conducive,
then you can do the samayik. So why do you alone take the
doer-ship for it; take credit for it? Therefore when something is
dependent on other circumstances, what part in it is yours? Do
people take such doer-ship or not? It is just egoism that one
continues to do so. Scientific circumstantial evidences do
everything but one claims ‘I am doing it’ and that is garvaras.
The worldly life continues as long as this habit of tasting
garvaras continues. Will you not have to understand this? Can
such wrong belief continue to prevail?
Questioner: But are we not born with all this?
Dadashri: Yes, one is born with it but that awareness
does not stay does it? And he continues to enjoy garvaras.
‘He’ likes the garvaras a lot. The moment he says, ‘I did four
samayiks,’ he swells with pride and then he feels sorry for the
person who does only one samayik. He will say that this poor
man cannot do samayiks. First, he feels sorry for the man and
then he becomes contemptuous; he has tiraskar towards him.
So the worldly life is perpetuated as a result of garvaras. That

330

Aptavani-9

is a big mistake. What can the Lord do in all this? That is why
Krupadudev has said,
‘Das varshey re dhara ullasi, mityon udaya karma no
garva re.’
‘At the age of ten, the brim of the ocean of bliss was
reached, along with the loss of the sense of doer-ship in the
fruition of karma.’
Does any man understand ‘udaya karma no garva’ –
the sweetness of doer ship of the fruition of karma? Who in
India can understand this? One can understand it only after ‘we’
explain it to him.
Fruition of karma (udayakarma) means that the udaya
(fruition of karma) is doing the samayik, not me. Then he has
no garva (doer-ship) if he maintains this. But people cannot
refrain from tasting the garvaras, right? Do they taste it or not?
‘I did four samayiks’ one will say and when you ask ‘why do
you say four?’ he will reply, ‘this man did only one’. I will
understand right away that this man is headed for moksha, for
sure (!)
What happens by taking garva? Your ‘neck’ gets
caught in a noose. Forget about moksha, but you create
thousands of lifetimes worth of obstacles towards moksha. He
did garva of samayik! Garva of the worldly life such as ‘we
went to this place’ and ‘we went to that place’ occurs. Does
one not take garva about going to different places? As if he
achieved something! As if his worries are gone. That is called
garva.
That is why people use the expression ‘a noose on the
neck’. It is a noose around your neck when you say you did
samayik, or you did pratikraman, or you did penance; that is
called taking garva.
Now what does it mean when people say, ‘A Sat Purush

Aptavani-9

331

does not have garva?’ No matter how much peace a Sat
Purush gives to others, he does not have a sense of, ‘I am giving
him peace, I am doing it.’ He knows that He is merely
instrumental (nimit) in the process and that He is merely
unfolding His own bliss for him.
Therefore He (the Gnani) does not have garva of
anything because when there is no ego at all, how can there be
any garva? There is garva when the ego is present.
‘We’ do not have that garva. ‘We’ do not have any
sense of, ‘I performed this action or I did this.’ It is because
people indulge in the taste of doer-ship that they are able to live.
Today even renowned readers of scriptures live on the basis of
taking garva, ‘I am doing it’; they are caught up in its euphoria!
In the presence of this garvaras, which he enjoys so
much, he does not like anything else. One will say, ‘I renounced
everything. I renounced my wife, I have come here leaving
millions of rupees behind, so I must be here for liberation!’ So
I tell him, ‘you know the reason you have come here but how
can we tell what other tastes you like to enjoy? You do not like
money, but there are many other tastes of garva out there; there
is garva of fame. As long as a person enjoys any garvaras, he
should not talk about liberation (moksha).
If we pour water on a drunk, will he not lose his
intoxication? The poor man will say, ‘Sir, there is no fool like
me. I do not understand anything. Sir punish me if you have to
but give me something.’ ‘We’ will liberate him first, because he
has become worthy of liberation. This is all the worthiness one
needs for liberation.
The intoxication (keyf) of ‘I know’ increases
with garvaras
One has read scriptures for many lives without attaining
anything. That is why Krupadudev said, ‘there is no solution (for

332

Aptavani-9

liberation) in the scriptures; the solution is through experiential
knowledge. Therefore, go to a Gnani instead of wrecking your
brain and ruining your eyes reading the scriptures.’ But then
people brag unnecessarily! Then the intoxication (keyf) of ‘I
know’ increases. That is a very strong intoxication. The
intoxication from alcohol comes down if we pour water over a
drunk but this intoxication can never come down, not even if
the Lord himself was to come down to decrease it. People
also have their own ideas about God because of the
intoxication (keyf) of ‘I know it’ has arisen within. When will
all this end for them?
Along with this keyf, one also harbors a desire for maan;
he wants importance and respect from others. As it is, he has
the habit of enjoying garvaras (taste of doer-ship). He would
not let go of garvaras, would he? It is very sweet. His
garvaras keeps increasing every time he says, ‘I did this’ and
‘I did that.’ How good he feels when he tells people what he has
done! Does he not feel good?
Have the ego of ‘I don’t know anything’
When does one attain the essence (dharma) of anything?
When he reads with intense devotion the words of great men;
highly evolved spiritual being with an inner intent of (bhavna) ‘I
do not know anything’, he binds merit karma (punya) and when
he does it with the intent of ‘I know it’, then he binds demerit
karma (paap) for sure.
Questioner: But it used to happen with only the bhaav
of ‘I know it’.
Dadashri: Nevertheless, what I am saying is that this is
all contrary. People merely believe they are binding merit
karmas; at least it is better than gambling.
Questioner: But how does that bind demerit karma
(paap)? That is not his intention. No one even gets hurt.

Aptavani-9

333

Dadashri: It is not to hurt anyone. He wants to enjoy and
keep on tasting doer-ship (garvaras) in it. There is no
substance in whatever he does when he enjoys the greatest
garvaras of, ‘I know it, I understand it’. Anything is done with
the foundation of this assumption has no substance. It is not
worth mentioning. Do not expose it too much. I expose it to
some extent and it looks bad. As long as one harbors the belief,
‘I know’, his face will never look fresh.
Questioner: But how can that be attained without the
ego?
Dadashri: What kind of ego does one need to maintain?
The ego one needs to maintain is where anything is done, it is
done with the ego of, ‘I do not know anything’. Such an ego will
give benefits, otherwise how can it? Otherwise it will only serve
to increase the ‘poison’, the poison within will keep increasing
for sure. If someone who knows all the four Vedas comes and
tells me, ‘I know all that’, then I will tell him in just one sentence,
‘you have not known even a drop worth!’ The definition of
knowing is that where one does not need to say anything.
Questioner: Can a person attain the goal if his ego is
saatvik i.e. if the ego is good and worthy?
Dadashri: It is difficult to maintain a saatvik ego. It is
very difficult to define such an ego. Saatvik ego, worthy ego is
that which maintains, ‘I do not know anything’.
Questioner: It is that which happens spontaneously and
naturally.
Dadashri: No, it is simply the ego of ‘I do not know
anything’. Therefore everyone is searching in vain. The whole
world is searching in vain. It is not possible to find even a single
word of truth. This truth is not such that it can be discovered.
The truth people have found is temporary truth; it is truth that
will perish.

334

Aptavani-9

Nothing can be achieved without realizing the Self. Until
then one has to keep wandering. This is because the Self cannot
be found in books. Where can you find it? The Soul can be
attained only from a Gnani but Gnanis are very rarely around.
That is why Krupadudev has said, ‘it (to find a Gnani) is rare,
rare, rare, rare.’ Gnani is never to be found. Where will you
find one?
The seer and the knower is not involved in
tasting garvaras
Questioner: What is a compliment (swaprashansa) and
what is garva? And what is the cause behind tasting garva?
What is the solution for avoiding it?
Dadashri: Compliment is when someone says, ‘you are
a very nice and likable person. It is hard to find a man like you.’
When someone says this to him, he will forget everything and all
day long he will do everything that person asks him.
And garva means to claim ‘I did such a great job! I did
it so well’. He enjoys the sweetness from saying, ‘how
wonderful a job’ about a task he accomplishes.
What is the reason behind wanting to enjoy garvaras? It
is the ego. There is ego behind it; the ego of ‘I am something’.
And what is the solution for avoiding and overcoming it?
After attaining this Gnan, all that has been done away with. Now
whatever remains is in the form of discharge. ‘You’ have to
remain separate from all ‘that’.
Questioner: Dada how can we maintain awareness; how
can we remain jagrut during the discharge (discharging effects
of karma)?
Dadashri: ‘You’ just have to ‘see’ whatever ‘Chandulal’
does. You have to ‘see’ even when ‘Chandulal’ is taking
garvaras and also continue ‘seeing’ him when he feels pleased
when someone gives him a compliment.

Aptavani-9

335

Questioner: And if he has done something good, he will
tell ten other people, ‘I did this and I did that’. What should be
done if that happens?
Dadashri: Yes, but it will only arise if he tells others about
his deeds. Garvaras is that which arises when he tells others.
He gets enjoyment from that. And if the other person is asleep,
he will not be satisfied until he wakes him up and tells him!
Questioner: But does he not get encouragement when
that happens?
Dadashri: He gets encouragement but what increases as
a result? Is the soul likely to increase? It is the ego that
increases.
Questioner: As the ego continues to get encouragement
does the soul not lose by that much?
Dadashri: That does happen.
Questioner: Now when it is in the form of a discharge
and one continues to ‘see’ it as a discharge, without interruption;
what is the process of that ‘seeing’?
Dadashri: When you watch a movie, what is being used
in the process? Your sthool (external) eyes and your sookshma
(subtle) eyes, both are used. When it is needed, these external
eyes are used for external things and the inner eye is used for
subtle understanding of internal things. So keep ‘seeing’ what ‘it’
(the pudgal-the relative self) is doing, that is all! Know what it
is doing.
Keep seeing all the garvaras the relative-self tastes, and
later, admonish him a little by saying, ‘Chandulal, why do you
still taste this? Why don’t you smarten up a little bit?’ That is all.
Questioner: Sometimes I tell him, ‘Be quiet and sit down
you bundle of nonsense!’
Dadashri: Yes, he will straighten out if you call him a

336

Aptavani-9

‘bundle of nonsense’. Tell him he will not get even four pennies
for his sense! Before they used to say, ‘akkal na baardaan
aviya’ ‘here comes the one laden with intellect’.
Now, is that garvaras bitter or sweet?
Questioner: It tastes sweet. But what should a person
do in order not to taste it?
Dadashri: You do not have to do anything. Our Gnan is
to simply know: ‘I am not the taster of garvaras.’ You have to
maintain the awareness (laksha) of who you are. There is
nothing to be done there, is there?
Our Gnan is such that you will not be able to take
garvaras and even if you do, you will do instant pratikraman.
If at any time, due to past habits the tendencies (vrutti) move
in that direction, then it will immediately uproot them.
Therefore those who have taken Gnan, our mahatmas, do not
taste garvaras. Others do because they have not found the
right path yet.

Garavata : stuck in indulgence of worldly
pleasures
Questioner: Then Krupadudev has used the word
garavata. Please explain the word garavata in detail.
Dadashri: What do you call garavata? What does
garavata mean? It is a different thing. Humans have garavata
and so do cows and buffalos. All humans, even our mahatmas,
have garavata. Even now people are immersed in garavata.
Now what is garavata? If you want to personally witness
garavata let me give you an analogy. Usually there are ditches
of fetid water near factories. These ditches are full of wastewater
from the factories. Because of the salt in the water, the soil in the
ditch breaks down to mud. There is a small amount of pitchblack water and mud about two feet deep. In order to escape
the hot summer sun, the water buffalos look for trees or other

Aptavani-9

337

things to cool down. Water buffalos are more warm-blooded
than the cows therefore they cannot tolerate as much sun. Cows
and goats can tolerate it. So a water buffalo looks to see ‘is
there a cool place anywhere?’ Don’t people do the same too?
They look for an air-conditioned room. So when the buffalo
sees water in the ditch, she goes in and when she finds mud in
there, she makes herself comfortable in the ditch.
So the buffalo goes and sits in it. On a hot day, the water
gets warm but the mud inside remains cool. The buffalo sits in
it peacefully. As she sits in it, the mud rises and covers her like
a coat. Her whole body feels as if it has been placed in a
refrigerator. The mud covers it completely up to her neck,
leaving only her head exposed. Only her neck is sticking out and
then she looks around. The coolness of the mud makes her feel
as if she is sitting in a fridge. The buffalos sit in this kind of ‘aircondition’ and humans sit in their rooms with air-conditioners.
Do you understand this? The buffalo feels as if she is sitting
inside an air-conditioned room! She will not leave this ‘fridge’,
no matter what you give her.
Now the owner usually milks his buffalo at three in the
afternoon so he starts to look for her and when he cannot find
her anywhere, he comes to the ditch. When he sees her sitting
in the ditch, he wonders how she is ever going to come out. He
brings her some hay and tries to entice her, standing at the edge
of the ditch, ‘Come get it, come and get it.’ The buffalo raises
her ears, looks at him and turns her head away but she will not
get up. Every day she gets excited when she sees hay but today
she is being obstinate. What is so good about that water? It is
the ‘coolness of the fridge’! Is she likely to come out from the
‘air conditioning’ and go back into the scorching heat of the sun?
This is called garavata. The owner realizes he cannot tempt her
with just hay, so he might try offering something tastier, perhaps
then she will get up. He realizes that for the time being she does
not care and will not come out until she is enticed with something

338

Aptavani-9

else. So, he brings some un-ginned cotton and jaggery and
shows it to her. He occasionally feeds her this and so he shows
it to her, to see if she recognizes it. She sees it and knows what
it is, but no matter what, she will not move away from this
garavata! She does not budge. She will not pay attention to
anything because the pleasure she feels in the ditch is not to be
found anywhere else. That is why she will not come out of the
mud. She will look but she will not budge. She thinks to
herself, ‘Who would leave such pleasure?’ This verily is
garavata.
This is considered the pleasure of garavata. This is how
everyone in the world takes pleasure in the garavata of the
worldly life. They will not come out of it. Men and women do
not budge at all! How can they when they believe the worldly
life to be the ‘fridge’ just as the water buffalo does? Do you
understand what garavata is? One can understand garavata
only when the Gnani explains it. So, understand the exact
meaning of what Krupadudev is saying. This analogy of the
coolness of mud in the ditch is given as a comparison with the
coolness people have found in the garavata of the worldly life.
Many Sat Purush – enlightened beings and Gnanis - have said
thus but people continue to sit in the garavata of the worldly
life, they give mere lip service to spiritual talks and remain sitting
in the ‘fridge’.
The Sat Purush is not in such garavata. They do not
remain in the ‘fridge’ anywhere. Even if you seat them in a
‘fridge’ or in a warm place, they will come out of it. They do
not like such garavata. People on the other hand enjoy the
garavata of the worldly life and remain in it all day long, they
do not even go to listen to spiritual discourses. That apathy is
garavata. People remain in worldly garavata and the buffalos
remain in the other garavata. People’s garavata is the pleasure
of the five senses. Carefree! Therefore, the whole world is
trapped in garavata.

Aptavani-9

339

The water buffalo does not realize that she will
eventually have to go home when the sun sets. So why not
shape up and get out. There is food at home and at the same
time she will also maintain her owner’s respect and her selfdignity. But she will not get up. Will she not have to go home
at night? When she feels cold she will come out of the ditch but
as long as she remains in the ditch, it is called a state of
garavata. When one becomes restless from the heat of a hot
summer day and indulges in three scoops of ice cream; that is
garavata.
See the garavata! The buffalo’s garavata is mud and the
human’s garavata is this worldly life. Buffalos have garavata of
only certain places but humans have garavata of women, airconditioners etc! A father will smile ear to ear because he thinks,
‘I have three sons so I will have three daughter-in-laws. I want
to build three homes for them.’ All such garavata arises. Just
as the water buffalo sits in the smelly ditch, the whole world is
stuck in garavata. People sit in the stench - nothing but the
stench of sense pleasures. In order to indulge in the stench of
such pleasures, they will put up with bitterness of quarrels.
People take pleasure of garavata from their looks, garavata of
sex, garavata of taste, garavata of illusion and greed and this
is why they do not like to come out of it.
Questioner: Dada, can it be said that we have become
like the buffalos because of wealth, fame, respect, status, etc.,
that we have attained?
Dadashri: Yes, you have become like the buffalos!
Questioner: Do we not need someone to get us out of
that garavata?
Dadashri: Yes you do need someone to get you out.
Who would do the enticing and the coaxing? What would it take
to entice you? What will the buffalo respond to when she will
not budge even with un-ginned cotton and jaggery? Is the

340

Aptavani-9

buffalo likely to ever come out? Such a pleasure is called
garavata.
Questioner: Which entity in the antahkaran–the inner
mechanism of mind, intellect, chit and ego - indulges in
garavata?
Dadashri: Which can it be? It is the ego; it is not anything
else. The intellect will explain this is garavata and it is pleasant.
Questioner: But the main involvement in garavata is of
the chit vrutti – the tendencies of chit, is it not?
Dadashri: The chit will have a tendency to rove around
there.
Questioner: In the places of garavata?
Dadashri: Yes, just like a fly, it roves and hovers around
there.
The mind (mun) is born out of opinions; a lot of
importance is given to the mind. Now how does an opinion
arise? Vishesh-bhaav - the sense of ‘I am Chandulal’ as
opposed to ‘I am Shuddhatma’ - gives rise to the ego and the
ego gives rise to opinions. Opinions give rise to the mind, which
in turn begins to make the chit impure. And as the chit begins
to become impure, one starts to sink in the mud. Now, who will
pull him out of that mud? In addition to that, there is the issue
of garavata! There is ras-garavata, which is garavata of
taste, riddhi-garavata, which is garavata of wealth, and
siddhi-garavata, which is garavata of special energies! A
person is trapped in these three kinds of garavata, so who will
pull him out of these garavata?
All this is garavata too…
Questioner: Can you explain this ras-garavata?
Dadashri: All the juices, like the juice of mangos, other
types of juices, the taste of basundi (ambrosia milk) etc.

Aptavani-9

341

Questioner: Are you referring to the tastes of food?
Dadashri: Yes, the taste; all those are called rasgaravata. Some people like certain foods a lot. If he is going
to get his favorite food for dinner, his chit will be in it from the
morning till it is cooked. His chit will be in it even after he
finishes eating. That is called ras-garavata.
The buffalo sitting in the mud is ras-garavata. Humans
have garavata in the taste of the five senses. One will not budge
from there; that is the ras-garavata of sense organs.
Then there is riddhi-garavata. ‘I have a mill…I have five
children…I have a bungalow…’ it is all riddhi-garavata.
Riddhi means anything related to money; worldly possession is
riddhi.
Questioner: What comes under siddhi?
Dadashri: Siddhi is spiritual.
Questioner: Give us an example of siddhi.
Dadashri: There is no problem for a tiger and a lamb
to come together in the presence of an ahimsak human being
– a person who is non-violent through the mind, body and
speech. Or if an angry person comes here (in this satsang), he
will forget everything when he sees ‘us’. It will make him forget
his nature.
The saints, ascetics and spiritual leaders have siddhigaravata. When someone comes to them saying, ‘I have such
and such an ailment’, they cash in their siddhi, they use their
special spiritual energy and then they remain in its garavata.
They feel happy when people give them respect and recognition.
People will bring them good food as a token of their
appreciation and they will eat and enjoy it. This is the kind of
garavata they enjoy. If they happen to attain certain siddhis,
they will live in the garavata of that siddhi. They do not think
of advancing themselves further.

342

Aptavani-9

Questioner: So does garavata halt progress?
Dadashri: Yes, because he becomes happy when people
start respecting him.
Therefore there is garavata of spiritual energy, wealth
and sense pleasures. There are many such garavata. There is
garavata even in scriptures.
Questioner: Is there garavata of scriptures too?
Dadashri: Simply put, garavata is anywhere where one
does not feel like moving away from; it is all garavata.
Otherwise, progress must be made everyday.
Questioner: Therefore, on the way to the final destination,
one should not stop anywhere, no matter what the location is
like.
Dadashri: You should not get stuck in any kind of
pleasures or happiness that comes along the way. A person will
feel good when he reads scriptures. He will feel at peace
because the words he reads are the words of a Gnani Purush.
If someone acquires a kingdom and becomes stuck in enjoying
it; it is all garavata.
People do not understand garavata; they do not
understand what it is.
Questioner: We understood very clearly from the
example you gave us of the buffalo.
Dadashri: Having heard this example, when people see
a water-buffalo sitting in a ditch, they will say, ‘Hey, there
comes garavata. Dada look at that garavata.’ I tell them,
‘Yes, you do remember!’
No one has defined garavata. The meaning of garavata
is not in any books and that is why I have exposed its meaning
with an example.

Aptavani-9

343

How can one be freed from garavata?
Questioner: So this illusion bhranti of pleasure, is a form
of garavata?
Dadashri: Everything is garavata.
Questioner: Does one not bring all the circumstances of
garavata one encounters from his past life? Is it not his karmic
account?
Dadashri: It has all been done and decided and he has
brought it with him.
Questioner: But even then he clings on to it again?
Dadashri: If one is not Self-realized (agnani) he clings
on to them. If one has Gnan and abides by the five Agnas, he
will not hang on.
Questioner: Can he still not break free from it? He has
to endure the suffering from it does he not?
Dadashri: He had endorsed it. (He had taken on the
liability by being the doer in the past life)
Questioner: Is he not endorsing it again by taking
pleasure from the current garavata again?
Dadashri: No, not if he has taken our Gnan.
Questioner: In this garavata, so far in this life, are the
tendencies of the chit not spread out?
Dadashri: It is all spread out. That is why focused
concentration cannot be achieved.
Questioner: So is this garavata not the height of
spiritual laziness (pramaad)?
Dadashri: Pramaad is a different thing and this garavata
is different. Garavata means one does not even think about
getting out. But a person with pramaad will think, ‘I am being

344

Aptavani-9

lazy (pramaadi), I need to do something higher’. Whereas the
one in garavata is not even aware or he does not even think
‘I am in garavata’. The whole world is in garavata. Up until
now everything is considered garavata. The water buffalo will
not get up.
Questioner: The sun will eventually set and the water
buffalo will have to come out. But do circumstances not change
in this way in order for human beings to come out of their
garavata?
Dadashri: No, it likes this. Even when the buffalo’s
owner feeds her good food, she will say, ‘No, I don’t want to
do anything with him’ but when she gets very hungry, she will not
perceive pleasure sitting in the ditch. She will get up if the hunger
pangs hurt her. She will get up if she is very hungry or if the
temperature outside cools down and it is no longer comfortable
to remain in the ditch.
Questioner: But there must be a key to getting out of
garavata?
Dadashri: When the temperature cools down she will
automatically come out.
Questioner: But do such circumstances arise in the life of
these human beings in garavata?
Dadashri: No, no. Right now they are all in garavata.
Are they likely to go from Pedar Road (luxurious area of
Mumbai) to Santa Cruz (working class neighborhood)? They
will only go when they become bankrupt. They will go when
they have no money, when they have nothing or when they get
evicted.
Questioner: So people cannot get out of garavata at
all?
Dadashri: Garavata! O ho ho! But are they even
prepared to come out of garavata? No, they are happy where

Aptavani-9

345

they are so they will remain there forever.
Questioner: But the real happiness is not there, is it?
Dadashri: It is not, is it? And yet the whole world
remains in garavata.
Questioner: So how can this garavata go away for
human beings?
Dadashri: It will go away if they see happiness elsewhere.
Questioner: Will it go away when they see happiness of
another kind, which is better?
Dadashri: Yes, then one can be freed. Happiness of
another kind will become established in his conviction (pratiti).
He will become convinced about the happiness, which he has
never seen before; ‘It is exactly what Dada says’, then it will go
away.
Questioner: Do our mahatmas have this garavata?
Dadashri: Yes, and they are able to understand that they
are possessed by garavata but they still like it.
Questioner: What is the solution for not wanting to stay
in the garavata and to come out of it?
Dadashri: The solution is to decide in your mind,
‘whether I have this or that, it does not make any difference to
me. They are both the same.’ Then there is a solution. Equal –
samaan! They are both equal in your eyes!
Questioner: So the pleasure one gets from garavata…
Dadashri: He considers the value of this and the value of
that to be equal; he makes them both equal.
Questioner: But what two values?
Dadashri: The value of this garavata and the value of
other things like food and drink that is available. It (garavata)

346

Aptavani-9

will go away when the value of the two is made equal. When he
comes to know and experience that there is no pleasure in either
of them, then it will go way.
People do not understand garavata.
Questioner: But for those who have taken this Gnan is
there any other solution to get out of garavata?
Dadashri: But who comes under the effect of garavata
‘Chandulal’ or the ‘Shuddhatma’? If the effect of garavata
remains, then he is ‘Chandulal’ and if not, then he has become
‘Shuddhatma’.
Questioner: But Dada we have come here to do Dada’s
darshan, we want to sit with Dada, we have interest in that too,
is that also not garavata?
Dadashri: No. That is not garavata. How can you call
it garavata? This is the main thing. This is like nectar. ‘We’ do
not have any garavata. ‘We’ do not have ras-garavata, ‘We’
do not have riddhi-garavata or siddhi-garavata; no form of
garavata whatsoever. The whole world is rotting in garavata.
The Gnani is never in garavata.
Attain Liberation with help of the Gnani.
God is very pleased with ‘us’. What kind of attributes
does a Gnani with whom God is pleased, have? He does not
have garva (doer-ship), he does not have garavata (any
worldly indulgence); he is nispruha (no inner inclinations) and
no unmattata (smugness).
Questioner: All these things go away when one becomes
highly spiritually elevated, do they not?
Dadashri: No. But one is considered a Gnani only when
all these kashaya go away. After they go away, ‘we’ say ‘It (the
Gnani’s speech) is a ‘taped record’ that is speaking.’ Nobody
in the world says, ‘It is a taped record’ (about their speech). If

Aptavani-9

347

they say something good, they swell with pride and say, ‘I
spoke so well. Look how well I spoke!’ Whereas ‘we’ say, ‘it
is a taped record that is speaking,’ because it is the speech that
has no ownership.’ Then there is no question of garva or
garavata. There is nothing of the sort. There is no other hassle.
The only sense of bondage is the inner intent (bhaav) from the
past life of wanting others to attain the same bliss that I have
attained. That is the only activity (kriya). This (the status of
Gnani) is the fruit of that intent.
Therefore, this is considered alaukik - beyond this world;
it is not worldly (laukik). Here ‘our’ speech (vani), conduct
(vartan) and humility (vinaya), all three win over your mind.
That eventually has to happen. You too will have to become like
that. If you follow the one who has become like that, will you
not become like Him too?
Questioner: Yes, we will.
Dadashri: That is all; there is nothing else to be done.
You should go after Him. Losses of countless past lives have to
be recouped in this one life. So you will have to be careful,
won’t you? This loss is from how many lifetimes? From
countless past lives!

* * * * *

348

Aptavani-9

[6]
Laghutam : Gurutam
(Laghutam – smallest, lightest, lowest, absolute humility.
Gurutam – largest, heaviest, highest)
The state of the Gnani is laghutam and
gurutam
‘We’ are not concerned even if ‘our’ liberation is delayed
by one more lifetime, but ‘our’ wish is that this Vignan be
propagated and that the world should benefit from it. That is
why I have come to explain it. I have the time. I have nothing
to do. I do not have any problems because I am the idlest
person in the world and absolutely without any intellect. I am
on my own and so I do not have any hassles. You have many
hassles. Otherwise, I am no better than you. Do you feel that?
It is only for the worldly interactions I am sitting on this high
seat.
In addition to that, do you know what my ‘height’ is (how
high I am)? Laghutam! What does laghutam mean? I am the
smallest and the lightest of all the jivas (living beings) in this
world. That is my ‘height’. As far as the worldly life is
concerned, I am the smallest. When it comes to name, fame,
looks, wealth, pride etc., I am laghutam (the lightest; lowest)
and from the perspective of the Self (the Soul), I am gurutam
(heaviest, highest). Therefore, in the home department – the Self
- I am gurutam and in the foreign department – the non-Self I am laghutam.
So what is laghutam?

Aptavani-9

349

Questioner: It means smallest of the small but can we
call it the best of all?
Dadashri: No, not the best. Laghutam! It is not the best
from this perspective. Laghu means small. Laghutam means
the smallest; there is no living being (jiva) smaller than the one
who is laghutam. That is the definition of laghutam.
Questioner: Is it the same as when people say, ‘I am
dasanudas – I am the servant of servants’ – the humble most?
Dadashri: No. People have reached a state of being a
servant of servants (dasanudas) but no one has reached the
state of laghutam. Whereas I am in a laghutam state and that
is why people will attain salvation. In the worldly sense, from the
relative perspective, I am laghutam and in nischaya – from the
real or absolute perspective, I am gurutam. I am nobody’s
guru. I consider the whole world as being my guru. I consider
you all, my guru. If I am sitting on the floor here, someone will
ask, ‘Why are you sitting here?’ People will not let me sit on the
floor. They will make me get up and sit higher up. Otherwise, I
prefer sitting down on the floor. Therefore, I am not in a state
of being a superior (gurupad), I am laghutam.

Laghutam must be your intent
So I am not your superior. You are my superior. I have
never thought myself as being superior, so you do not have a
problem do you? You will be afraid of me only if I was superior
to you, you may feel ‘He is a big man, what will he say?’ You
may scold me but I will not scold you. If I scold you then it
means I am in the wrong place. And if you scold me, it is
because of a misunderstanding on your part. You do it because
there is weakness in you, is that not so? Otherwise, the whole
world is my superior because I am laghutam. How many
superiors do you have? Why don’t you say something?
Questioner: I am not ready to accept laghutam.

350

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: Why? Is it not possible? It is like this,
gurutam means to climb higher. When you have to climb a
mountain, does it take more effort to climb up or down?
Questioner: To climb up.
Dadashri: So laghutam means to come down; that can
be done very effortlessly, can’t it? ‘We’ did it very easily. So
always, have an inner intent of laghutam. The more the inner
intent (bhaav) of laghutam you have the greater will be your
progress towards gurutam - the Self. And you attain a state of
gurutam only when you become laghutam in the relative life
God is very pleased with the one without
mamata
That is why in the worldly interactions (vyavahar) I am
laghutam and in nischaya – in the realm of the Self - I am
actually gurutam. I do not have any superiors. Even God, the
fully enlightened One, is very pleased with me. Then what else
remains for me?
People tell me, ‘You call yourself ‘Dada Bhagwan’?’ I tell
them, ‘No Why would I do that? When God, the fully
enlightened One within, is pleased with me, then why would I
have a need to be called Bhagwan (God)? The ‘ruler’ of the
fourteen worlds has become pleased with me and your ‘ruler’
within you too, will be pleased with you if you do what I tell you.
It is better to have the Lord within be pleased with you. What
will anyone gain from being a God? Let him be the God,
whoever he is. The ruler of the fourteen worlds has become
pleased with me and I am showing you the way in which you too
can attain the same.
There is great danger in being a God and I would invite
tremendous liability on my head. What do you have to lose?
Why would I get into that? Why would I want to do that? God
has become very pleased with me, what is wrong in that?

Aptavani-9

351

So is it better to be a God or to have God become very
pleased with you? Which state is better?
Questioner: The state where God becomes very pleased
with us.
Dadashri: Now who would give up a higher state for a
lower one? And I assure you that God is very pleased with me.
I also tell him, ‘Why don’t you leave?’ and he tells me, ‘Where
can I go? I will tell you if there is any place.’ I told him, ‘If you
manifest within someone else, I do not have any problems with
that. You have stayed here for many days.’ But surely there has
to be a suitable place where He can go, right? That location has
to be without mamata – without ‘my-ness’; without ego, only
then can God manifest there. Such a ‘room’ is needed. Does he
not need a good place?
God can become pleased with anyone. If a person has a
little ego there is no problem, however God will inevitably
become pleased with the one in whom all mamata (‘my-ness’)
is gone. He will be very pleased with the one whose mamata
is completely gone.
Junior of the junior
I am the only junior in this world. A person can become
a senior of the entire universe if he becomes a junior of juniors.
I am the only remaining junior. Do you want to make me a
senior? If you do, you will become the junior of a junior.
Questioner: But as compared to you, we are like little
children!
Dadashri: That is a different matter altogether and what
I am talking about is different. People think I am a guru, but I
am not a guru; I am laghutam. Laghutam means junior.
Everyone and everything around me are my seniors. The trees,
the leaves, they are all senior to me. So would you like to be
a senior or a junior from now on?

352

Aptavani-9

Questioner: In that sense, I would like to be a junior of
all juniors.
Dadashri: Yes, yes. There is benefit in it. Then you can
become a senior of all seniors. Those who want to remain as a
junior of all juniors; they will be able to become the senior of a
senior.
LCM: Lowest common factor is God
When I was young, a teacher in a Gujarati School told us
to learn laghutam (LCM). So I asked him, ‘What do you mean
by laghutam? How can something be laghutam?’ He replied,
‘You have to find the smallest indivisible number, a number that
cannot be further divided, from the numbers I have given you.’
At that age, do you know what term I used for people and
individuals? I used to say, ‘this ‘number’ (rakam) is no good.’
Therefore, this subject suited me. I used the same terminology.
So then it occurred to me, ‘it is the same in these ‘numbers’
(humans) too, is it not?’ I thought to myself, is it not the same
in these ‘numbers’ (human beings) too? God dwells in everyone
in an indivisible form.
From that moment onwards, my nature began to lean
towards laghutam. It did not become laghutam but it began to
lean towards laghutam and then eventually it became laghutam.
Now “by relative view point I am completely laghutam and by
real view point I am completely gurutam.” Therefore, in matters
concerning worldly dealings, I am laghutam. I was able to
adopt this theory of laghutam right from the beginning.
Only the laghutam state has value
Questioner: So Dada why do you give so much
importance to the laghutam state?
Dadashri: This laghutam is forever a safe side. The one
who is gurutam has fears. There is no fear of falling if I say
laghutam, is there? Those who sit higher have fear of falling.

Aptavani-9

353

Nobody in the world is in a laghutam state; the world is in a
gurutam state. Those who become gurutam are the ones who
will fall. That is why I have become laghutam. My intent
(bhaav) towards the world is laghutam and that is why I do
not have any fear of falling; nothing affects me and nothing
hinders me.
In the ‘relative’ realm, I am laghutam. I say, ‘Sir, I am
smaller than you. I am even smaller (lower) than the word you
use to insult me with.’ At the most, he can call me a donkey.
But I am way smaller (lower) than a donkey. Being a donkey
is a heavy load, is it not! And I am without any load. So if you
want to curse me, I am laghutam. Laghutam is like space akaash. Laghutam does not feel anything; he will not be
affected if he is insulted; nothing affects the one who is
laghutam.
What I am really saying is that if you want to show-off
your importance (rof) towards me then I am laghutam and if
you want me to be important, then I am gurutam.

Laghuta takes you towards guruta
If someone calls you unworthy, then an unworthy person
will not have any grounds to argue, will he? Unworthy means
laghutam. So is there only one kind of lineage of people in the
world? Everything has been going on from the beginning of time,
and as such there are no unworthy people but the worthy
people call them unworthy and those unworthy people call
these worthy people, unworthy. I investigated this deeper and
found that they call each other unworthy. So it is not easy to
find justice in this.
Questioner: Laghutam is the justice.
Dadashri: Yes, laghutam is the justice. Everyone shapes
up when a laghutam person comes along. Then there is nothing
to worry. And those who are worthy, no matter how much you

354

Aptavani-9

try to make them laghutam they will take you towards
gurutam.
Instead of being helpless in all
respects…become laghutam
So eventually will you not have to have intent (bhaav) of
being laghutam? Otherwise, does a man miserable from a
sickness not become helpless and dependent (laachaar) before
a doctor?
Questioner: He does!
Dadashri: It is better to become laghutam than to
become helpless and dependent (laachaar). You should not
become helpless, no matter what.
All these prominent people, if they get a stomachache,
they will say ‘I will do whatever you tell me, doc.’ They become
helpless at that time. They are very helpless; they cannot tolerate
pain, ‘please save me from this pain, doctor.’ They have tried
lifelong to be gurutam and their constitution becomes weak and
sensitive. One needs to have a strong constitution to become
laghutam. A laghutam person will take the approach of ‘do
what you have to, doctor’ but they will not become helpless
(laachaar).
‘We’ have never shown any helplessness in ‘our’ life, not
even if they were to cut ‘us’. To be helpless (laachaar) in all
areas is tremendous violence (himsa) towards the Self. It is
atmahimsa - violence towards the self. There is bound to be
pain and suffering as long as there is a body. There is no way
out of that. But you should not become helpless. You should
become laghutam instead.
One’s real Self is the Soul - the owner of infinite energy.
So when you say, ‘I am helpless’, how low a state is that? How
can you be helpless? How can something that has Soul be

Aptavani-9

355

helpless? There is no helplessness where there is the Self. Why
not become laghutam instead?
Consequences of guruta
Do you have a desire to be laghutam?
Questioner: Yes.
Dadashri: That is very good.
Questioner: They say, ‘Prabhuta se prabhu door’
meaning God distances himself from the one who wants to
become God.
Dadashri: Yes and that is why I have said that I remain
liberated and laghutam. Still I enjoy the grandeur of a gurutam
state. My appearance and conduct is laghutam. For the world
I am the smallest; I am laghutam and for those who want to
attain Gnan, I am the greatest, I am gurutam. So, if you want
liberation, I am gurutam and there is no one higher than me.
And if you want to be great in the worldly life, then I am
laghutam. Now if people want liberation and if I do not say I
am gurutam, then nothing will be achieved. And what do
people want to be in this world?
Questioner: They want to be gurutam.
Dadashri: Where did you see that?
Questioner: I have seen it in me.
Dadashri: But that is not the case with people outside, is
it? Are there any gurutam people out there?
Questioner: Yes.
Dadashri: Is that so? Are they all not in gurutam? They
all believe ‘this, the relative self, is the atma and we have to
make it gurutam.’ Everyone has a desire to be gurutam.
Everyone wants gurutam. They get the slightest of respect and
they are happy and their gurutam increases. They want

356

Aptavani-9

liberation and yet they become gurutam. Now is that a
contradiction or not? That is a sign for wandering for countless
lives because all those who have tried to be gurutam in the
worldly life, have fallen. They all became trapped. Tell me, did
they get trapped or not? Only those who became laghutam
were able to swim (through the ocean of life). This path is not
for those who want to be gurutam. Those who try to be
gurutam take a beating and in the end become senseless, and
create obstacles (antaray) in their path to liberation. Do you
understand what I mean by obstacles?
Questioner: How can one get rid of those obstacles
(antaray)?
Dadashri: You have to have the bhaav of laghutam –
the inner intent of beings small - then the obstacles will all go
away. All the obstacles will go away by doing ‘plus-minus’. The
obstacles arose from the inner intent of wanting to be gurutam
and with intent of becoming laghutam, they will all go away.
What do you need gurutam for? What is the advantage
of it? The higher one goes the harder he falls. Instead, what is
wrong with staying at the bottom? Then there will be no
problems! Your bliss will remain with you and when it is time for
your liberation, dharmastikaya - the element of motion - will
automatically take you there; you do not have to do anything.
So become laghutam and everything will be resolved. To
become laghutam is your absolute state (purnapad). This is
my laghutam form and only then can there be a gurutam
form. No one has become gurutam without becoming
laghutam first.
And where I have become laghutam, people are trying
to be gurutam. People want to be guru in the relative world.
They try to be guru only of the relative world. Guru means one
has an inner intent of ‘I want to become someone big and
famous’. Those who try to be laghutam in the relative world

Aptavani-9

357

will go to a higher life form. But no one shows any signs of trying
to be laghutam in the relative world. Whose fault is it if people
bind karma of a life in the animal kingdom by trying to become
gurutam? They try to be gurutam where they should be
laghutam and consequently they increase their ‘number of legs’
(subsequent birth in the animal kingdom); they go from two legs
to four and they even get a tail! This is because in the gurutam
state their certain actions will cause them to bind karmas such
that in the next life they will have two extra legs and a tail.
Whereas with the laghutam belief, whatever you do will be
done wonderfully. But the whole world is looking towards
gurutam.
Questioner: So one becomes laghu - light and humble?
Dadashri: No, no, not laghu. They become animals with
four legs! As they try to become gurutam in the relative world,
gurutam will enter into the picture again. Then do we not need
a solution to get rid of that gurutam? They go from ‘two legs’
to ‘four legs’ so that they do not fall! Otherwise, from where
will we get donkeys? Where will you get these cows and water
buffalos? These poor people are nice enough they become
cows and water buffalos and clear their karmic debts with
each other.
It is all because they became gurutam in the worldly life
and deprived others of their possessions. Do people not do
that?
There are two things people do. In the relative life guruta
works in two ways: one as a super human being and the other
as a beast. If a person conducts his life as a super human being
where he does good deeds, he will get a life in the celestial form.
The other consequence of guruta is that he will go into the
animal life form first and come back into the human form after
he gets rid of (pays for) all the entanglements he created. I have
personally witnessed this law of nature. People do not realize

358

Aptavani-9

what justice is going to be served to them. They will go from a
two-legged human to a four-legged creature with a tail!
However, we cannot say this to these people. At the moment
they are living a carefree life. What do they say? ‘We will worry
about all that when we fall’. So let them flaunt their superiority
(rof) for the time being.

Laghutam in the world leads to the ultimate
gurutam, the Self
The whole world looks for gurutam in the relative. So to
begin with there is a desire to be guru and then they show their
superiority (guruta). Then he tries to be gurutam - the highest
of all, after becoming a superior. But no one has become
gurutam this way. What does our Vignan – our spiritual science
- say? It says, ‘Laghutam in the relative and gurutam in the
real.’ That is our main thing.
What does every religion claim? They say liberation is
through their religion. Does anyone say there is no liberation
through their religion? Everyone will tell you, ‘Our religion is the
best.’ Who is the only one that can say his religion is the lowest?
The one who has found the path of the Vitarags can say, ‘Our
religion is lower, but yours is higher.’ Children will always call
that which is small, big. Those who are not mature will be
impressed by anything and anyone. Older, mature people place
themselves lower and make others feel higher and more
important; they are content with that.
And we are not anyone’s superior; are we? On the
contrary we are below him and that is why he behaves well; he
remains straightforward otherwise he would not. He will oppose
you if you try to be his superior. If you say, ‘I am your disciple’,
he will be straight with you.’ Everyone enjoys being a guru and
thus showing superiority in the relative world. There is also
competition with one another. One guru will claim ‘I have one
hundred sixty disciples’ and other will say, ‘I have one hundred

Aptavani-9

359

twenty disciples.’ All this is superiority (guruta). One needs to
be laghutam in the relative. Then he will not fall; there is no
suffering or misery in laghutam.
Otherwise, one will have to become a cow or a buffalo
from here. When a person dies, he will take anger-pride-deceitgreed along with him. Separation due to differences of opinions
(matbhed) is not going to go away easily in this life! They will
go automatically when one’s life form changes but not otherwise.
There are no such straight men around, are there? On the
contrary, one claims, ‘I am something.’ You fool! What do you
think you are?’
Now, who would want to be laghutam in the relative?
Does anyone seek this state? If you were to look for such a
person, are you likely to find one in this car, train or anywhere
else; can you find such a person? Will you find one amongst the
ascetics? Every ascetic keeps saying, ‘hum, hum, hum, I know
this many scriptures…I know this…I know that etc.’
Whatever degree of laghutam you have in the relative
world, you will attain that much gurutam in the real - in the
realm of the Self. I became laghutam and that is why I attained
the state of gurutam. The path is not difficult. The difficulty lies
in understanding this.
God will definitely come to you if you take up the
laghutam yoga -union with laghutam. People are all in the
gurutam yoga - union of gurutam - in this world. ‘I am greater
than him, I am greater than them…’ So why don’t you start
becoming smaller. If you become smaller in worldly interactions,
you will become bigger in nischaya, the realm of the Self, and
if you try to become gurutam in the relative world, you will
remain laghutam in nischaya (in the realm of the Self). So if
one holds on to the union of laghutam, then when he achieves
the laghutam state, he will begin to be gurutam on the other
side (real). He who becomes laghutam in the worldly life,

360

Aptavani-9

becomes gurutam in the realm of the Self, and thus God
becomes very pleased with him. So do become laghutam.
Union of laghutam is a little difficult. It is difficult in the
beginning and then it becomes easy. Is there any fear for those
who want to be small? That is why I became laghutam first;
only then did I attain the state of gurutam. I have not tried to
be a guru. Those who become guru will continue to wander in
the cycles of different life forms. When they bind merit karma,
they are born as celestial beings. Then they return here as a
human beings and bind demerit karma, which takes them to a
life in the animal kingdom.
People have practiced all other yogas for so long. Man
has practiced them for countless past lives, then when someone
gives him a little respect, he loses whatever little he gained. Once
he gets a little respect he will start, ‘Not this, bring me this, bring
me that and this...’ So then he loses whatever he had gained
from all the yogas, whereas laghutam yoga is better because in
that practice, no one will come to do your darshan.
Undertake the yoga of laghutam
So ‘our’ yoga is of laghutam. Nobody in the world has
such yoga.
Questioner: What does a person have to do in such
yoga?
Dadashri: You have to become lighter day by day. You
have to become laghu, not guru (heavy); you have to become
lighter. By becoming a disciple (shishya) of everyone you will
become a disciple of the whole world, even of the dogs,
donkeys, trees, leaves; disciple of everybody and so you will
become laghutam. You become laghutam by making everyone
gurutam. Do you like this yoga of laghutam or not?
Questioner: I do like it.

Aptavani-9

361

Dadashri: This is the very meaning of yoga. One gets
hold of either yoga of gurutam, excelling in worldly life, or yoga
of laghutam; it is one or the other.
With the yoga of gurutam one becomes heavy; he
becomes gurutam. Guru means heavy and when something is
heavy; it will sink. As he sinks, he also takes down everyone
around with him. When does a guru not sink? He will not sink
when he has the gurukilli – the key that helps him float. Laghu
means light and guru means heavy. Those who want to be big
and famous have grabbed on to the gurutam yoga. Everyone
wants to be big and they have all taken a beating in the process,
they have died in such beatings, life after life. No one succeeds
because how many can take the first prize in a horse race? How
many horses win the trophy? If five million ‘horses’ run a race,
how many come first? The first prize goes only to the winning
horse, does it not? The rest die huffing and puffing. Therefore,
practice laghutam yoga.
Questioner: Yes, but what is the vidhi - special process
- for it?
Dadashri: The vidhi is to become a disciple of everyone
in this world. If someone calls you unworthy then become his
disciple by saying, ‘You are my guru because you made me
aware that I am unworthy.’
The world’s guru? No the world is the guru
And people tell me, ‘We want to make you our guru.’ I
tell them, ‘No. Do not make me a guru. There are many gurus
elsewhere. I have made the whole world my guru. I consider
you all as my guru. Why are you making me a guru?’
I am nobody’s guru. I am a laghutam Purush. I am not
naïve that I would become a guru. I have never been anyone’s
guru. I live as the disciple of the whole world and I tell everyone
to become laghutam. Whoever wants to become a guru let him

362

Aptavani-9

be. But how can a guru swim across the ocean of the worldly
life and help others swim across too? Such gurus have to keep
a gurukilli (special key) with them so that they are able to swim
and help others do the same. The Gnani can give them the
gurukilli to become laghutam, and then they may become a
guru. Otherwise, to become a guru in the current time cycle is
a sign of going down to a lower life form. Gurus of the Dwapar
and Tretayug - the previous eras of the present cosmic time
cycle - were true gurus. And now? Now they do not even have
the gurukilli as a guru. So I tell the gurus, ‘Do not become a
guru otherwise you will sink and drown and you will drown
others too. Take the gurukilli from me.’ One has to have the
gurukilli. When ‘we’ give that gurukilli, his work will be done.
Gurus should be certified, they must be free of all kashayas and
they should also have the gurukilli.
What is a gurukilli ?
Questioner: What is a gurukilli?
Dadashri: A guru should keep in mind his role as guru
and which path he needs to take so that he does not sustain a
loss, and that all his disciples benefit. Therefore, his guru should
have taught him to remain laghutam: remain laghutam and then
carry out your duties as a guru. Yes, this is the gurukilli. He will
pay a heavy price, while playing the role of the guru, he
becomes gurutam – assumes superiority. If he remains laghutam
and then plays his role as a guru or whatever else, then the real
fruit of his actions will be a gurutam state, the expression of the
state of the Self. But for the time being, he continues to be
laghutam.
Questioner: But what should that guru do in order to
become laghutam?
Dadashri: He just has to maintain an inner intent (bhaav)
of wanting to be laghutam. When someone refers to him as a

Aptavani-9

363

‘guru’ – and there is no other word for this worldly interaction
vyavahar, then he should say, ‘Yes, I am his guru’, but from
within he should know that he is laghu.
Therefore everyone in the relative world should try to
maintain a state of being small to the smallest. One should not
try to be guru - superior.
‘Exactness’ through laghutam
Questioner: You say, ‘I am the most laghutam of atma.
There is no superior over me. I am absolutely independent.’
How can others not remain free in this way? Why is it necessary
to follow the agna of a guru?
Dadashri: Everyone is independent indeed! What is the
need to abide by a guru’s instructions (agna)? One has to
remain in the agna of the one within, but the kashayas of angerpride-deceit-greed within continue to beat him up incessantly.
So who can become free and independent? The one whose
anger-pride-deceit-greed is gone, can be free. Otherwise he
cannot be, can he?
And the disciple will follow the guru’s agnas if they are
acceptable or he will not if they are not. These Agnas (the five
Agnas) are not mine. They are one’s ‘own’. I never scold
anyone. I have never scolded anyone to this day. I have told
everyone that I am his or her disciple. By the relative viewpoint
I am everyone’s disciple; I am laghutam and by real viewpoint
I am gurutam. Therefore, from the viewpoint of worldly
interaction (vyavaharik), there is no one inferior to me;
everyone is superior to me. And through the real viewpoint, the
viewpoint of the Lord, there is no one superior to me. That is
what I am saying. Do you understand? So is everyone not my
superior? I am the disciple of everyone.
Questioner: But they come here to you to attain (gnan)
from you. How can a guru come to you?

364

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: ‘We’ have already become laghutam. They
have not become laghutam yet, have they?
One will become like me when he becomes laghutam.
But Gnan and everything has been given. I have given the kind
of Gnan, which alleviates all worries, which abolishes all
attachments and abhorrence, even while conducting worldly
business. But one cannot attain the state as ‘ours’ until he
becomes laghutam.
Questioner: You refer to everyone as guru, so when will
they become disciples? And how will they become disciples?
Dadashri: Now that is the very effort everyone has
gradually started of ‘I want to be like Dada.’ ‘We’ have only
one condition, and that is ‘we’ do not scold anyone. You just
have to observe me and become like me, that is all. (Watch the
Gnani and become like him). Become laghutam and only then
will ‘exactness’ come. Therefore, that much work is left.
The world’s disciple is the world’s superior
(upari)
In our Vignan (science), ‘Dada’ becomes your disciple. I
have given Gnan to so many people; I am the disciple of every
one of them. I am a disciple of the whole world. Who can
become the supreme being of the whole world? The one who
has not become a disciple of the whole world cannot be the
supreme most. Who can become supreme (upari)? None
except the one who has become the disciple of the entire
world.
Questioner: Lord Dattatraya adopted good attributes
from wherever he could and from whomever he could and it is
said that He had twenty-four gurus. Now the scriptures say that
one should have only one guru. Please shed some light on this.
Dadashri: One needs to make the whole world his guru.
Attain gnan (knowledge) from wherever you can, but what

Aptavani-9

365

does it mean when they say there should be one guru? It means
that one guru is needed for the kindergarten level, one for the
first standard, one for the second standard etc. The person who
goes to college will need twenty-four gurus and the one going to
graduate school-university level will need to become a disciple
of the whole world. That is why ‘we’ have become a disciple
of the whole world. This will be the case for the upper level
college. But before that, how long should a person have only
one guru? One guru is fine for the levels of the kindergarten, the
first standard, the second standard; one guru will suffice for the
lower standards where children are taught ‘for the time being,
do only this much and do not look anywhere else’. Otherwise,
everything will be ruined. In this way they establish a base for
them. Then as the standards progress, they have to make the
whole world their guru. The lower standards have to make only
one guru. If a person tells me, ‘Sir I have made one guru’, then
I would understand right away that he is in the second standard.
I will tell him, ‘You are right.’ Does that answer your question?
Questioner: Yes, it does.
Dadashri: Ultimately, it is worth making every living
being on the earth your guru. What did Lord Mahavir do? He
made every living being of this world his guru and he lived as
their disciple. That is because there is always something to learn
from every living being.
The precise manner in which Akram Vignan
arose
This Akram Science of ‘ours’ is one which I have come
to learn from you all and you tell me, ‘You are giving us the
Knowledge.’ This Akram Vignan is not to be found in books so
where did it come from? It has come from everyone. They left
their (gnan) knowledge for me and took other gnan with them.
They left behind the gnan they could not digest and took with
them the knowledge they could. So all that gnan, which they

366

Aptavani-9

could not digest accumulated with ‘me’ and that Gnan came to
manifest as Akram.
Questioner: But did such Akram Vignan come out of
worthless people like us?
Dadashri: No, not worthless. It was the gnan that you
could not digest, it lay around, it all came to me here; and you
took from here, all that you could digest. So the full Gnan; “the
full stop Gnan” (the absolute knowledge) came to me!
Now how can people understand this talk? The educated
(bhanela) and the wise (ganela) will understand this but others
will not. This is not for those other poor people, is it? This is
scientific (vignanik). This means this science is such that even
the scientists of foreign countries will accept it if they sit and
listen to it.
Know the State of the Gnani
No body actually touches my feet although they seem to
think they are. ‘I’ do not remain in this body even for a minute;
‘I’ have not been in this body for a moment in the past twentyfive years. People, on the other hand, are constantly in the state
of ‘I am this body. This hand is me, this leg is me, this head is
also me and all this is me too.’
‘I’ remain absolutely separate from this mind, body and
speech. So if someone was to insult or strike ‘this’ (the body;
non-Self), ‘I’ (Self) will not have any problems, will ‘I’? People
do not know ‘me’ so how can they insult ‘me’? Those who
know me, know me as the Parmatma (Absolute Self), so they
would never insult me or behave negatively towards me. People
know me either as A. M. Patel or they know me as a guru. But
I am not any one’s guru. I am a laghutam Purush. I am what
people call ‘Gnani’. As a Gnani, ‘I’ am absolutely laghutam.
‘We’ have attained this state because ‘we’ do not have
any beggary. The state that is the highest of all, the greatest state

Aptavani-9

367

there is in the universe, I have attained, because there is no
beggary (bheekh) of any kind at all. ‘We’ do not have any
beggary for money. Even if people were to bring heaps of gold,
‘we’ have no use for it. There are no thoughts of sex. Even if
the celestial goddesses were to come down here to earth, there
would be no untoward thoughts. There is no beggary for maan
(respect). There is no beggary for disciples. There is no beggary
of wanting to build temples.
Now if you understand me as a Gnani, then you too will
become a Gnani. If you understand me as an acharya - spiritual
master - then you will become an acharya. I do not have any
problems if you think of me as an acharya, but you will become
an acharya. So whatever state you desire to be, see me as
being that state and you will attain that state. I do not want to
become anything; I have already attained the state. I am a man
who has failed by four degrees (in attaining the Absolute state)!
Having failed, I sit here as a laghutam Purush. Therefore, this
state of ‘ours’, however one understands it as, ‘that’ is the state
he will become. If one understands this, then his work is done.
One’s conduct should be of laghutam intent
There is no state smaller than that of the laghutam. So if
you attain this bhaav of laghutam, do you have anything to
fear? You cannot become prominent by simply having the intent
(bhavna) to be so. You can only become gurutam if you
remain in a state of laghutam. So if the worldly interactions are
in a laghutam state, if ‘Chandulal’ remains in a laghutam state,
then the gurutam state will be attained automatically but not
otherwise.
Questioner: Does not the Gnan you give us, make us
attain the state of laghutam?
Dadashri: Yes, it will give you a laghutam state but this
bhaav –the deep inner intent - of gurutam within you has not
gone yet, has it? The intent of wanting to be gurutam in the

368

Aptavani-9

interactions of worldly life (vyavahar) has not gone, has it? You
have to get rid of anything residual like, ‘I am something’. There
is a solution if you understand this point, but otherwise it is not
possible.
There is no state other than the state of laghutam if one
wants to become absolute (purna). The most difficult bhaav in
the world is that of laghutam. How can the world attain the
intent of laghutam? Not a single person in the world can attain
the state of laghutam that you all (mahatmas) have attained; it
is not an easy thing to attain; it is the most difficult state to attain.
People may ask you, ‘how is it going?’ Then you should
say, ‘I lose my friend. I give up.’ Now, when you say, ‘I lose’,
then in the realm of the real, you become gurutam automatically
and naturally. Therefore you should have an inner intent of
becoming laghutam. Otherwise there is wandering around in
different life forms if you become gurutam. The enlightened
ones in human form are never ‘gurutam’. Only the partially
filled ‘pots’ try to become ‘gurutam’. The absolute beings
never make a sound (to draw attention to themselves).
Is there anyone who would not want to become
gurutam? The prominent people in society may also appear of
wanting to be laghutam; they appear to be laghutam on the
outside but within, their bhaav is that of gurutam. It is a bhaav
of, ‘I am something compared to everyone else’. On the outside
they are respected, but they can never attain the vastu - the
Self, the Soul. That state can only be attained when one
maintains a line of demarcation between the real and the relative.
Otherwise, worldly conflicts can never decrease.
Line of Demarcation
“The world is the puzzle itself”; it has puzzled itself. God
has not puzzled this world at all.” It has become a deep puzzle
by itself. ‘There are two view points to solve this puzzle. One
is a relative viewpoint and the other is the real viewpoint.’

Aptavani-9

369

If the Gnani Purush can draw a line of demarcation for
you between the ‘real’ and the ‘relative’, then this puzzle can be
solved.
Besides the Tirthankara Lords, no one had this line of
demarcation. The twenty-four Tirthankaras had placed this line
of demarcation correctly as did some others who became
Gnanis. Then, ‘we’ have placed a precise and exact line of
demarcation. Whom can you call a Gnani? You need Gnanis like
the Tirthankaras, who differ only slightly and who place a
precise line of demarcation between what is real and what is
relative. They make it clear: “This is real and this is relative.”
What has happened in the world is people believe the
relative to be real and then they go about their life with this
belief. They have not attained the reality even for a day and they
accomplish nothing. They wander around for countless births
from one life to another. There has never been a line of
demarcation between the real and the relative and that is why
the world is in a state of confusion. Because of this people
believe the relative to be real and they try to make the relative
gurutam; give it increasing and undue importance. They make
gurutam of that which is to be made laghutam; that which
needs to be devalued. This verily is the illusion (bhranti). Then
what do they claim? ‘We are removing the illusion’, but the
illusion is actually increasing. Don’t you think so?
Say a scientist carries out a certain experiment and I carry
out the same experiment. If I do not know how to conduct the
experiment, what is likely to happen?
Questioner: A sudden fire.
Dadashri: Yes and all the ingredients would be wasted.
All my efforts would be wasted and on top of that I will burn
my fingers. What would happen if I stuck my finger in the
experiment to test it? And if the scientist were to stick his

370

Aptavani-9

finger to check it, he would not get burnt. Do you understand?
Therefore, the one conducting the experiment should be
familiar with it. I have given you the line of demarcation
between the ‘relative’ and the ‘real’ and so you do not have
to worry.
The intent of Laghutam makes one follow
The Five Agnas
Now what are ‘we’ saying? You now have the exact line
of demarcation of what is real and what is relative. The line of
demarcation delineates exactly, ‘this much is real and this much
is relative’. In the ‘real’ there is the Shuddhatma, the Self. And
in ‘the relative’, you have been given the five sentences (the Five
Agnas). Everything else is nikali - simply a discharge of past
karmas - it is of no concern to You, the real Self.
Questioner: Does the discharge continue to take place?
Dadashri: Yes, the discharge is taking place on its own.
A person does not have to wait in anticipation to go to the
bathroom in order to relieve himself. The one who sits and waits
is a fool. Thus, everything else is a discharge. So what do you
have to become?
Questioner: Laghutam.
Dadashri: Laghutam! Yes, just simply this bhaav. And
Dada’s Agnas are in the laghutam bhaav. So now, you simply
have to become laghutam in the relative. When the line of
demarcation between the ‘real’ and the ‘relative’ is established,
and when you become laghutam in the relative, then you will
have inner bliss amidst all the worldly miseries. That is true
samadhi.
How laghutam have you become?
Questioner: That only Dada can know. I do not have a
‘thermometer’ to gauge that.

Aptavani-9

371

Dadashri: But have you become somewhat laghutam?
Two cents or four cents worth?!
Questioner: But how can we measure that?
Dadashri: You will know that you have not become
completely laghutam when you are fighting with someone. You
still have the tendency to attack people, ‘who does he think he
is?’ So now you have to look for laghutam. Do you want to
become gurutam or laghutam?
Questioner: Laghutam.
Dadashri: You like it when people give you importance
and yet you say you want to become laghutam? When people
put their hands together and do ‘namaste’ to you, you feel
happy, and then you say, ‘I want to become laghutam.’ The
baggage within is so difficult and complicated; everywhere there
is baggage of only gurutam. Despite this, what should your
vision (drashti) be?
Questioner: To become laghutam.
Dadashri: Then the soul within will continue to become
gurutam. ‘We’ sit here having become laghutam. ‘Our’ Self is
gurutam. You too have to cultivate the same vision. What else,
there is nothing difficult in this.
What does our Vignan say? What does Akram Vignan
say? However much laghutam you become in the relative, You
will become gurutam by that much in the real; You will become
absolute. Is there anything wrong in this? Otherwise, the entire
world is trying to be gurutam in the relative. That is why we
have bulls and buffalos here! What is the basis for their
existence? It is simply because of this mistake of wanting to be
gurutam in the relative. So should you not break this mistake
once you are born as a human? Don’t you think the mistake
needs to be broken?

372

Aptavani-9

Where there is total laghutam, there is the
state of the absolute
The one who has attained a state of ‘devaluation’
(devaluing the relative-self) in the relative becomes absolute in
the real. Therefore, devaluation in the relative is needed. You
may eat, drink and enjoy, but there must be devaluation, nothing
else. Does the devaluation of the rupees that occurs sometimes,
affect people? Life goes on. Sometimes there is devaluation and
sometimes there is elevation. But does that affect people at
large? Similarly there is no harm in devaluing the relative life. On
the contrary, there is nothing but gain. You just have to live
happily. Just look at me. I am sitting here having gone through
the process of devaluation. What fun it is.
Now what am I saying? Your absolute state will blossom
as your devaluation of the relative increases. So is this not the
easiest way? Is anything difficult in this? There is nothing else to
understand here and laghutam will not make you worry about
anything. See is there any worry about money after devaluation?
Before, how many worries did you have when there was
‘valuation’? People had anxieties and fear about being attacked
on their way to the bank. Now there is nobody there to attack
and no worries. There is no problem after devaluation.
If you are a millionaire but you know how to maintain
humility, if you know how to sit low, you begin to become
laghutam (be humble) in other ways; you will become gurutam
at the other end, the Self.
The one who tries to be laghutam in the relative, will
become gurutam in the real; his state will become absolute. You
do not have to do anything in order to become gurutam. So in
your worldly interactions, when you want to say anything, just
keep in mind, ‘there is no jiva (living being) smaller than myself.
I am the smallest’. If you maintain this awareness, it is more than
enough. If you become laghutam only then will you attain the

Aptavani-9

373

main state and only then will the state of the absolute Self
(Parmatma) become yours. Therefore, the state of the Lord is
to become complete laghutam. When you attempt to become
laghutam in the relative life, then you will naturally become
gurutam and absolute. The absolute state of the Self will
manifest naturally; it will become ‘exact’ naturally.
The goal of becoming laghutam
Have you ever seen a laghutam Purush in this world?
Questioner: Dada is laghutam, is He not?
Dadashri: Yes, that’s it, all you need to do is observe this
laghutam Purush and become like him, what else? You do not
have to learn anything else from here.
Our mahatmas have understood that Dada has taught
laghutam - the state of ultimate humility. Now Dada Himself
has become laghutam, so others have no choice but become
laghutam too, correct? And that is the only goal one should
decide on. If you want to attain eternal bliss then nothing else
needs to be done in this world. ‘We’ are sitting in the laghutam
state; the ego-less state, in the relative world, and ‘we’ are
telling you all to become just that. ‘We’ are not saying anything
else, are ‘we’? ‘We’ estimate that it is going to take you a year
or so to become laghutam?
Questioner: But to become laghutam, is no ordinary
feat.
Dadashri: No, It is not that big a feat. Once You have
decided, ‘I want to become laghutam’ the mind, intellect, chit,
and the ego will all go only in that direction. Thus they will
proceed in the direction of the decided goal. If You say, ‘I want
to go Santa Cruz right now, then it - the non-Self complex will
go there. Therefore decide the goal.’
Nobody in this entire world will ever make a decision to
attain the state of ultimate humility (laghutam). Our mahatmas

374

Aptavani-9

are the only ones who would make this decision that they want
to become the most humble amongst all beings, because they
have attained the Self. And the people out there in the world are
under the illusion of that which prevents the awareness of the
real Self.
The Grandeur of the state of Laghutam
Therefore, after this Gnan I have given you a line of
demarcation: an adjustment of relative-real has been established.
Now there should exist in you, the khumari (the vigor of nonfluctuating spiritual energy) of the state of laghutam. Khumari
of what? The whole world has external khumari (an aura of
superiority) about being gurutam and what is Your khumari? It
is that of being laghutam. So there is nothing else to it.
People say, behold the khumari of Dada! There is
khumari in the state of ignorance. But this too is a state of
khumari, is it not? It is khumari that can never change, not
even for a second. No matter when you look at him (Dada),
he looks the same. Circumstances may change, but not Dada.
Ultimately, you have to become like Him. That should be your
goal.
So I have given you this line of demarcation and now you
remain in the khumari of laghutam. Whenever you do any
business now, it is in the hands of vyavasthit. All You have to say
is, ‘Chandulal, continue working. Drink tea if you have to but
continue working.’ That is all You have to do. So You should
have a khumari of laghutam. People have a khumari of
gurutam anyway. But what kind of khumari should You have?
Questioner: Of laghutam.
Dadashri: Yes, but do not keep a khumari of your
material wealth. It has to be the khumari of laghutam. Can you
handle that?
Questioner: Yes I can.

Aptavani-9

375

Dadashri: In this Vignan you can get your sons and
daughters married, that is, you can carry on with your worldly
life and celebrate everything. Nothing will hinder You because it
is all relative and You are in a state of laghutam. So go ahead
and celebrate with as much pomp as you want because where
does your khumari lie? It lies in the state of laghutam. Those
who have the khumari of gurutam have problems but the
khumari of laghutam will remain for sure.
To attain the Self is verily the gurutam
When one becomes laghutam, the Self is gurutam. So
there is no need to make the atma (the self) gurutam. It is
necessary for you to become laghutam.
Questioner: If one becomes laghutam then the soul (the
self) will become gurutam, but the Soul (the Self) by nature is
aguru-laghu neither heavy nor light.
Dadashri: It is aguru-laghu but that is a different
perspective. What does gurutam mean? It means to proceed
towards the state of the aguru-laghu. That is gurutam.
Questioner: But it is not aguru-laghu in reality?
Dadashri: Now that is different. Its absolute state is
aguru-laghu and in the worldly interaction (vyavahar) when it
becomes laghutam, then gurutam is the state in the real. I
easily remain laghutam in the relative and the Self and within
there is gurutam all the way.
Test examination of the laghutam
Questioner: Give us an example of You having become
laghutam in the relative realm.
Dadashri: For example, ‘we’ are verily the open, talking
Upanishad, are we not? ‘We’ are the talking Puraan, are ‘we’
not?!
I will explain what it means to become laghutam in the

376

Aptavani-9

relative perspective. Say if someone is giving you a ride in a car
and one of his relatives comes along. If he tells you to get out
of the car because of his relative, you should do so without
being affected. A little later, he tells you to get back in the car
and so you get inside the car. Again, another of his relatives
comes along and he asks you to come out again. Again, you
should get out without being affected. What if this happens eight
to ten times? What usually happens to people? They get upset.
They get terribly upset.
Questioner: One will be terribly upset the first time it
happens.
Dadashri: And ‘we’ remain the same, unperturbed even
if they were to do that to ‘us’ twenty seven times! ‘We’ will get
out and get back in because ‘we’ have become laghutam.
The Foundation of Akram Science
Laghutam is our center. Gurutam is attained while sitting
comfortably in that center. Our theories are unique and
completely new!
The foundation of this Akram Vignan is to remain
laghutam and maintain abheda drashti – vision of oneness; no
separation with anyone. To keep this vision of oneness (abheda
drashti) with all living beings in the entire universe is verily the
foundation of Akram Vignan. This Vignan is not without a
foundation.
All other activities (kriya) are occurring automatically;
they continue mechanically. There is a big difference between
vision (drashti) and ‘mechanical’- that which is occurring by
itself. Vision is the main thing and the mechanical part is a
different thing all together.
The one, who has not received, decided or experienced
the vision of becoming a disciple of the whole world, cannot
become a Mahavir (the fully enlightened One). It is the vision of

Aptavani-9

377

becoming a disciple of young children, the foolish and all the rest
of the people.
Liberation with the laghutam ego
Questioner: How do you define laghutam? Is bringing
our ego to a zero level considered being laghutam?
Dadashri: No. The ego remains the same but it is also an
ego to say ‘I am smaller than everyone.’ Laghu means ‘I am
small’, laghutar means ‘I am even smaller than small’ and
laghutam means ‘everyone is bigger than me.’ That too is a
kind of an ego (ahamkar).
Now the world is based on the ego of gurutam, which
is the intent to be bigger than everyone; it is the belief of ‘I am
greater than everyone’; this verily is the cause of the worldly life
(sansar), whereas with a laghutam ego, one goes towards
attaining liberation (moksha). Laghutam ego means to conduct
interactions of worldly life with the intent, ‘I am smaller than
everyone.’ That will take him towards liberation. By believing, ‘I
am greater than everyone’, one enters into a ‘race course’
(competition) and on to the wrong path through unawareness.
With laghutam ego one gradually becomes smaller and smaller
until he becomes completely laghutam; therefore one becomes
Parmatma, the absolute Self.
There is no racecourse in laghutam
Up until now, all efforts have been towards becoming
gurutam, have they not? ‘I want to be greater than him; I want
to be greater than him.’ See, the competition has begun, has it
not? Who wins the prize? The prize goes only to the horse that
comes first. What about the rest? There is no prize for them
even after running so hard.
Questioner: Dada is there a racecourse in a laghutam
state?

378

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: No there cannot be any racecourse in the
state of laghutam. The racecourse is in the gurutam state. So
I have no intellect (abuddha) and I am in a laghutam state and
therefore I do not have a relationship of exchange of kashaya
with anyone. There is not an iota of intellect in me.
The racecourses of the worldly life and
competitiveness (spardha)
Questioner: Everyone has a desire to be something, and
here around you, we have the desire of not wanting to be
anything, we want to be free from any semblance of superiority
(visheshata). In the worldly interactions, one feels, ‘I am
something. And I want to be something.’
Dadashri: That is because they enter a racecourse there,
do they not? He wants to run because so many other horses are
running. Hey you! You are sick so why don’t you relax and take
it easy? All the others are strong horses, besides only the one
who comes first will get the prize and the rest will die huffing and
puffing.
So, not even a fool would take part in a competition
(racecourse). Yes if they were going to award five hundred
prizes or so, then one can believe that he may get lucky and win
a prize. But you are not going to come first, so why are you in
the competition? Go home and go to sleep. Who would enter
the competition? How can you enter their racecourse? Some
horses may be so strong from a diet of chick peas (garbanzo
beans) while others may be eating grass.
Therefore, I did not enter the racecourse of the worldly
life. That is how I found this Lord within.
And the prize goes only to the one who comes first,
does it not? The rest are left wandering around life after life.
They die huffing and puffing and gain nothing. How can one
enter a racecourse of the world with that kind of justice? What
do you think?

Aptavani-9

379

Questioner: That is correct.
Dadashri: And the human nature is to be competitive.
Are people not competitive?
Questioner: Yes they are. That becomes cheap.
Dadashri: There is competition everywhere. Even at
home, if an argumentative person comes along, he will start a
competition between the husband and wife. If the wife says
something, the husband will tell her, ‘You be quiet, you did it this
way and I am going to do it this way…’ Hey! Both the horses
have started running? Who is going to give you the prize? That
is why ‘we’ say, ‘We’ do not know how to do things the way
Hiraba knows.’ So ‘we’ let her run. Run. Run as much as you
want to! Even Hiraba says, ‘You are naïve (bhoda).’ I tell her,
‘Yes that is fine.’
People suffer because they compete. They enter
competitions. Just watch the competition; you have to simply
‘see’ which horse comes first. When one continues to simply
‘see’, then the ‘seer’ (jonaar) has no pain or suffering. Those
who enter a ‘racecourse’ have to suffer the pain. So it is not
worth entering a ‘racecourse.’
Criticism ruins everything for the one who
criticizes
Secondly, you should no criticize (do teeka of) anyone;
the one who criticizes, hurts himself. Whatever anyone does, the
person who criticizes him will ‘stain his own clothes’, and then
he will ruin his body as he goes deeper into the criticism. If he
goes even deeper, he will ruin his heart. So criticism is a tool that
ruins people. You should not get involved in it. Know things for
the sake of knowing them but do not get involved in anything.
You have not attained this human life to criticize anyone. What
is more, it is not worth making an intense mental note (nondha)
of anyone that criticizes you.

380

Aptavani-9

Questioner: A person must have some interest in our
work that he criticizes (do teeka), is that not so?
Dadashri: To criticize is the main attribute of the ego. It
is an attribute of competitiveness (spardha) and that is why
criticism remains. Besides, competitiveness is always there in this
worldly life. There is liberation when competitiveness leaves.
When people go on fasts, it all occurs due to the effect of the
attribute of competitiveness; ‘that other person did fifteen fasts,
so I will do thirty!’ Still, it is not worth criticizing anyone.
When you criticize other people, you ruin your ‘clothes’
first, then your body and then your heart. That is it. So do not
get involved with anyone because is everyone not an owner of
his world, his space, inner and outer? The ownership titles are
his own. How can you criticize or violate that? You are
trespassing when you do so.
The escape from the racecourse
Now all this (competitiveness) is going to carry on for
sure. One is not at all the doer of anything; he has simply
developed a habit of tasting the fruit of doer-ship (garvaras).
When a person learns that someone earns eight hundred rupees,
he thinks, ‘I earn eighteen hundred so I do not have a problem.
He gets only eight hundred.’ This is how it all starts. As if no one
earns more than eighteen hundred rupees. There is always
competition where there is someone higher. What possible
reason do we have for staying in this race course? Are we here
to take part in a ‘racecourse’? Are we horses of the
racecourse? Instead, why not simply admit that you have no
sense? I say, ‘I do not have sense. I lack worldly understanding.’
I am being very candid, am I not?
I do not even know how to shave and that is why I cut
myself shaving. I have yet to meet a man who knows how to
shave. What ego people walk around with! Only someone like
me would make such a statement, would he not? There is a

Aptavani-9

381

whole world out there, and here I am all alone with this vision
(of laghutam). There is no one to give my vision the vote. I am
the only one with this vote, against the racecourse and that is
why I am not raising my voice. I would remain quiet because I
am the only one voting (on the side of laghutam). Otherwise
who would caution you this way? Why would I sit here to
caution you? So, what a world one is trapped in?
Do you like to listen to all this talk? You are not bored are
you? Do not try to analyze this. Just accept it as it is, otherwise
the liability will fall upon you. This is a pure thing; this knowledge
is pure, why do you have to analyze it with your intellect? That
is why I say it very clearly; ‘We’ do not understand anything in
worldly matters’. Only then will everyone leave ‘us’ alone! Only
then can I be free of all worldly possessions!
The misuse of intellect in daily life
You can find all kinds of people who abuse their intellect.
Such people will say ‘I will win your case for you. Just pay me
three hundred rupees.’ Do people not say that? He eats and
drinks at home, takes abuse from his wife and then he does
work for us! Nowadays, the standard of living has gone up, has
it not? So they charge more now, do they not?
Also, people of India do things according to their own
understanding, they are over-wise, they misuse the intellect,
(they are vikalpi people). They don’t learn by asking, ‘what will
happen if we press this button on this machine?’ They do not
learn by asking the technicians of the machines. Everything goes
on haphazardly. People in India do not even know how to use
a razor blade; they don’t even know how sharp a razor should
be; they sharpen it once and it is done. And if a person is a
miser he will keep using a sharpening stone and on the contrary
lose whatever sharpness the blade already had. What are
people of foreign countries like? They are not vikalpi and overwise, are they? The shaving razors always come with instructions.

382

Aptavani-9

Why are there numbers printed on the razor blade 1,2,3,4,5,6,7?
They (non-Indians) will ask the technician and do as he instructs
them. Whereas our people, the vikalpi Indians are over-wise!
If the wife says ‘I am going to the temple and I will be back
soon’, the husband will say, ‘I will prepare the food,’ and he will
(without asking anyone how to make it). But whatever spices he
uses will leave a bad taste in the mouth!
If the radio is playing and the children ask me to switch
the station, I will tell them I do not know how. I always ask
before I do anything; I learn by asking. I do not attempt anything
aimlessly on my own.
I would ask someone how to use the razor, but he has
not consulted a technician himself and then he tries to teach
me! Does that mean I know how to use it? He is a fool and
so am I. Whom would I ask if I cannot find a technician? It
is like trying to cook a curry without learning from anyone and
ruining it.
Our people are such that they will cut their own hair if
they cannot find a barber. That is how people are. Just because
you clip them this way and that way, does that mean the job is
done? It (hair cutting) would not be considered a skill if it were
that easy. How did all these barbers learn to cut hair? By trial
and error?
The foreigners have made machines to last because they
know that people of India are vikalpi; they are over-wise and
thus they might take shortcuts. They make the machines in such
a way that they do not breakdown easily. They build in extra
safety features, which would not be necessary if people using
them were not vikalpi. You never know which buttons they
will end up pushing. They build in extra safety even when
laying the foundation in construction of homes because these
crazy people will overcrowd the homes! What if the house
were to collapse?

Aptavani-9

383

A miser thinks he knows how to use a razor very well. He
will keep sharpening the blade with a sharpening stone. You fool
this blade is not something that can be sharpened on a
sharpening stone. There is no relation between the blade and the
sharpening stone. It is a wonder if one knows how to use it
correctly. Once I told someone, ‘I do not know how to use the
blade and neither do you, so whom should we ask?’ You bring
stainless steel blades for me but I do not know how to use them,
so what can the stainless steel do about it? It becomes useless
in the hands of the one who does not know how to use it.
Therefore all this is misuse of intellect, being over-wise
(vikalpi, thoka thok). All worldly knowledge is such that it will
never lead you to liberation.
The zero ego state of The Gnani
I do not even know how to give lectures. I know only
‘this Gnan’. I don’t know anything else in the world. I came to
know this Gnan because I did not know anything else. And I
have not gone anywhere to learn the worldly things. Otherwise
anyone and everyone will want to be my guru. Instead, why not
become an expert in the Self? This will make me nirleyp absolutely unaffected?
I do not even know anything about the worldly life. I did
not know anything in school either. All I knew was that I did
not want a boss (upari). That was the only thing that bothered
me. I did not have any problems with whatever I got to eat or
drink, but I did not want anyone as a boss over me. This body
has brought forth with it all its adjustments, and necessities for
this life.
Now this Gnan is such that it will do everything. I do not
know anything related to the worldly life but even then the work
continues very well, better than everyone else’s. Everyone else
has to complain and shout to get things done. I do not have to
shout or say anything. Yet the work gets done better than one’s

384

Aptavani-9

expertise and know-how. Those who know how to mend shoes
have to continue mending shoes. Those who know how to stitch
clothes have to continue stitching clothes and those who do not
know anything; they have to sit around idle. What can the one
who knows nothing, do?
The Lord has said that whatever knowledge of learning
one has is sustained on the basis of the ego. The one, who
knows nothing, does not have the ego, does he? If the ego is
there, then he will know what to do for sure. I know only this
one thing; the Gnan. Yet people have an illusion that Dada
knows everything! But what does ‘He’ know? He does not
know anything.
‘I’ know only this: ‘I’ know only about ‘the Self’. ‘I’
know that the Self is the knower-seer (gnata-drashta). ‘I’ can
see whatever the Self ‘sees’, but I do not know anything else.
‘I’ would know only if ‘I’ had the ego (ahamkar). The ego has
been absolutely uprooted. It has no roots left whatsoever. There
is no trace or sign of where it was. All its rootlets are gone. How
great a state that must be!
It must be due to sadhana (spiritual endeavor) of so
many past lives that this current state of ours has manifested so
abruptly. Otherwise, I have not learnt anything from this current
life at all. I have not seen any proficiency in any man. I have not
seen any human being as a doer at all.
If a shoemaker is not proficient in his trade, he will
continue making shoes but at the end of the year, he will have
incurred nothing but a loss. This is how people in this time cycle,
are. They incur nothing but a loss. Those who misuse the
intellect incur more losses than profits. They ruin all the leather.
They make the shoes but they also waste leather worth five
hundred pairs. Where is the profit in that? They will put in the
effort but incur unnecessary loss as well. This is the story of the
worldly people. They work and struggle hard in their pursuits of

Aptavani-9

385

worldly profits but in the end they lose, because they have not
gained even a glimpse of the Self. And so the bottom line in their
business (life) is a loss. Karmas dictate what one will gain or
lose so what is one going to earn of one’s own accord? All
one’s earnings are because of his punya – merit karma. But all
these ‘sacks of intelligence’ just wear away their shoes out by
running here and there in their struggle.
So why not just go about your business with the approach
of ‘I don’t know anything’. Just come down to a zero level,
cross out everything and start a new. Begin with new values.
What value is this? Our value of Shuddhatma is for sure the
best. The Self is unaffected (nirleyp) and without any association
(asang). Here ‘we’ have given you the absolute values. You
have become a Shuddhatma when Dada gave you the state of
Shuddhatma. Otherwise, there was nothing there, not even a
penny’s worth.
Win in this world by losing
After Gnan You have the constant meditation (dhyan) of
Shuddhatma, the Self. So every evening You should ask within,
‘Are you Chandulal or Shuddhatma? If the reply is, ‘Shuddhatma’,
then realize that the whole day you had the meditation (dhyan)
of Shuddhatma.
Questioner: People will think we are mad if we say that.
Dadashri: If they say you are mad, they are saying it to
‘Chandulal’. Nobody will tell ‘You’ (the Self) that because they
do not even know You, do they? Therefore, you can tell
Chandulal, ‘Chandulal if you are mad, people will say so. If they
call you mad when you are not, then the liability is theirs. It is
not your responsibility!’ You have to say this to Chandulal.
Questioner: We do not like it when someone calls us
mad or senseless.
Dadashri: You cannot have the best of both worlds; you

386

Aptavani-9

can have one or the other. If you want liberation, then you
should let go even if people call you crazy or beat you or
whatever else. You should tell them, ‘Sir I sit here defeated.’ I
told one man who had come to me, ‘You have a desire to defeat
‘Dada’, don’t you? Well I accept defeat! You got what you
wanted. Instead of you going back having lost; I am already
defeated so you just have a nice meal and go to sleep.’
So how can one deal with such people? All this is nothing
but unnecessary mental wars and entanglements. It is better for
the body to suffer but this affects your mind and that is the big
problem.
People want to enjoy the transient and fleeting worldly
pleasures but they also want the bliss of the Self; they want both
and that is not possible. If someone comes to defeat you in the
world then you should allow yourself to be defeated and sit
down peacefully. People will taunt you, ‘so you’ve become a
Shuddhatma, eh?’ They will abuse you in many ways because
that is their nature. They have not found the path of liberation
and they will not let others find one either. That is how people
are. Ultimately You will have to reason with them or coax them
one way or another and tell them, ‘I have lost’, then they will let
you go.
These people have not listened to anyone. Therefore, you
should realize that they come to you having defeated everyone,
so all you have to do is say, ‘I lose and you win. I have lost
against you.’ They will be able to sleep if you tell them this. They
feel triumphant in thinking they defeated Chandulal and they will
be content.
You are correct by your viewpoint
‘We’ do not halt ‘our’ progress in any situation. ‘We’
would make a request to the other person one time, then ‘we’
let go and move on. How long can ‘we’ sit around? ‘We’ would
explain everything to you, but if you keep sticking to your

Aptavani-9

387

viewpoint and become obstinate, then ‘we’ will let go. ‘We’
would recognize that you do not see what ‘we’ are saying; so
how long can ‘we’ sit there and explain things to you? One
should not remain sitting forever, should he? Should we not just
move along? The other person cannot see beyond his viewpoint,
can he?
If a man is standing with a white horse about 300 feet
from here, and you ask someone, ‘what is that standing over
there?’ He might say, ‘It is a cow’, does that mean we should
hit him? Why would you want to hit him? He is calling the horse
a cow, so should we hit him because of that? No! He cannot see
at distance, so where is he at fault? At least it is good that he
is not calling it a donkey! You will have to accept that. He says
what he sees. That is how this world is. Each person says what
he sees.
Do you understand what I am saying from this example of
a donkey? Would people not say things as they see them? You
should understand that is what the poor man sees and that is
why he says what he does. You should tell him, ‘you are right.’
According to what you see, you are right. You should not tell
him ‘I am right according to my viewpoint’, either. Otherwise, he
will say ‘wait, tell me what is your viewpoint’. On the contrary,
he will make you sit. Instead, tell him he is correct in what he
sees and move on.
‘We’ may look naive but ‘we’ are very shrewd. ‘We’
may appear like a child but ‘we’ are very shrewd. ‘We’ will not
sit around with anyone. ‘We’ will move on. ‘We’ will not hinder
‘our’ progress.
The Gnani Purush has only talks that are of benefit to all.
Even if you understand only two of His words, it is enough. If
you understand just two of His words and if you take them to
heart and digest only one of the two words, that word will not
leave you until You attain liberation. That is how much energy

388

Aptavani-9

and power there is behind the Gnani’s words (vachanbud).
That is how effective these words are - vachan siddhi.
Find the ways to lose in life
That is exactly why ‘we’ say to you, ‘all of you are right.’
There is no competition (spardha) in our Akram Vignan. It is
unparallel (ajod) and second to none. You can call it heavy if
you want or you can call it light if you want to, but it is
incomparable (ajod). No one is in competition with it.
‘We’ are not in competition with anyone. If someone
were to ask ‘us’, ‘Sir, what is this group (religious) all about?
What is their teaching like?’, ‘we’ will immediately tell him that
‘we’ do not have any attachment (raag) or abhorrence
(dwesh) towards them. ‘We’ will tell them as it is. ‘We’ have
no competition (spardha) within. ‘We’ are not concerned with
it. And ‘we’ do no want to win in this competition. What will
‘we’ do by winning? ‘We’ are only interested in the goal of
salvation.
Some people even come to me and talk negatively, I say
to them, ‘I had no knowledge about that all; I only came to
know about this through you and you know everything.’ I will
say this to him and send him back because he will not be able
to sleep otherwise, and I will incur a fault if I do not let him win.
‘You win, so go home now and sleep peacefully.’ I tell that to
many people. He wants to win so let him win. He will not sleep
if he is defeated and I will sleep even if I am defeated. The more
I lose, the better I sleep.
Find ways to lose. Learn to lose. This is ‘our’ new
discovery. The winner will lose one day, but a loser will never
lose. The one who sets out to win has failed from the start.
These are not battles. Whether one sets out to win in the
scriptures or anything else, he has failed the moment he sets out
to win.

Aptavani-9

389

This Gnan is non-competitive. It is not a competitive
Gnan. That is why we say it is very rare…rare…rare. It is very
rare to find a Gnani Purush.
Expert in One, but in everything else…
It has also been printed in the Aptavani (Dadashri’s books
on Gnan) that ‘we’ are abuddha (without any intellect). I tell
people ‘I am abuddha’, so the well wishers plead, ‘do not say
that, please do not say that!’ Dear brother! You too should say
the same thing. You too become abuddha! If not, you will be
beaten to no end. These people will ‘break your legs’.
Therefore, you should not talk about becoming someone
with intellect (akkal). That is why ‘we’ have discovered the
factory of ‘abuddha’. See what ‘we’ discovered! And in the
worldly life if we do not understand something, we can find a
lawyer and tell him, ‘please take this money and do something
about it. This man has been after me so find me a solution.’ Why
would we use our akkal (intellect) negatively when we can find
someone to do so? You can hire someone for twenty-five
rupees, some for Rs. 50 and some for Rs. 100, and some you
can hire for 500 rupees for the whole day. Why should we use
our akkal when you can hire people like these? Do you
understand this?
And this man is very punyashadi (one with a lot of merit
karma), that people tell him, ‘you have no sense (akkal)’. That
is very good. That is like winning a trophy.
Such people have not allowed me to sink deeper. They
say to me, ‘hey, wait do not go in. You will sink. You will get
stuck in the mud!’ And so ‘we’ say, ‘very well.’ ‘We’ attained
this Gnan because we remained at this shore, otherwise we
would have sunk. We did not use the intellect that misguides
and leads people into conflicts. Otherwise look at the faces of
those who are sunk; they look as if they just had some castor
oil!

390

Aptavani-9

Questioner: But what if the people consider us fools in
all respect?
Dadashri: Yes, but that is precisely what you need to
become. Your tremendous merit karmas have awakened! You
should not interact with those people with pleasure and ease.
With them, you should pretend, only as a show, that you want
to enter the ‘horserace’ and compete against them. But when
you go there, go ahead and lose the race, so that they feel good
about winning. I have done that so many times and I tell them,
‘I am not very smart. I am clumsy.’ This is the best solution.
Otherwise all these are nothing but race horses and racecourses.
In these racecourses, whom will you run against? When we do
not have even the energy to walk, whom will we run against?
However, people will then tell you, ‘then run with the older
people’ so I tell them ‘but I can’t even run with people older
than myself and really I don’t know anything else.’ What use do
we have for this babuchak’s (incompetent’s) intellect; an
intellect that one can even rent?
You can hire experts from anywhere. If you ask someone
what his expertise is, he will say ‘income tax’. He will be for
hire, the doctors are for hire, the lawyers are for hire, and
everything and everyone is for hire!
Every man is an expert in his own field and occupation
and incompetent in others. I am better off. Instead of calling
myself an expert in something, I say ‘I am babuchak
(incompetent) in everything.’ A person can be the best solicitor
in India but in certain matters he will say, ‘For this you will have
to go to someone else.’ Even a prominent doctor will come to
us when he wants his home built, however the poor man is
modest. It is because he has no clue about construction. That is
how the world is. They are incompetent in other matters. No
one person can be good in everything and therefore he has to
be considered incompetent in other things, does he not? So why
not be incompetent in everything? Do you not understand?

Aptavani-9

391

Instead of calling yourself a banker with assets of as little as a
thousand dollars why not say, ‘I am not a banker, you are.’ Is
this discovery of ‘our’ not good?
I asked one person, ‘How are you going to run your
factory now that your boss has died?’ He tells me, ‘We will hire
a manager.’ So one can hire people to manage factories? So
why are you crying because the owner is dead? If you can hire
such a person, hire such an intelligent person, why not do so?
And can this (Gnan) be hired? This Gnan is the real wealth.
You can hire people can’t you? You can hire a lawyer, can you
not? If he charges 5000 rupees, then why not give him 10,
000? He will come running. He can be hired but the Self
cannot be hired. And is anyone going to hire the Self? How
can they afford that which is priceless? This is a proper and an
easy road, is it not?
And why harbor such intellect in such matters? So ‘we’
have let go from the very beginning in these matters, I had let go
of the control of the reigns and tell everyone, ‘I do not
understand anything!’ So ‘we’ are free! I also say, ‘You will not
find any intellect in me even if you were to look for it.’ They tell
me, ‘Please don’t say that.’
Now we have the control of the ‘kite’. Other people’s
‘kites’ can take a nosedive if they want but our ‘kite’ is in
control and the control is in our hands. Why enter the horse race
of these people? Each person to himself; I will take care of
myself.
And what are you going to do with this misguided intellect
(akkal) anyway? You would have sunk very deep for sure had
you gone deeper into it. It is good that you stayed away just like
me.
People come to me and tell me, ‘you show us a lot of
good things’ and I tell them, ‘no’, and in the end I even tell them,
‘I have forgotten everything. I cannot remember things anymore.’

392

Aptavani-9

People like it when I tell them, ‘There is no substance or
competence left in me.’ Otherwise these ‘people with substance
and competence’ will come to make deals with me. Is this even
a place – with the Gnani – to make deals? ‘We’ are higher than
everyone! Deals are to be made with people of your own
caliber. I am above everything and at the same time without any
substance and competence. That is why ‘we’ say, ‘What are
you looking for in someone who has no substance?’ Even to the
robbers and thugs ‘we’ say, ‘what is there to take from me;
from the one without any substance and competence? In fact I
don’t even know how to give and so take whatever you want
from my pocket, yourself!’
When I was young, people used to scold me and tell me
‘you do not have any substance or competence.’ Now rather
than have anyone else tell ‘us’, ‘we’ might as well tell ‘ourselves’
that ‘we’ have no substance. All the problems will go away if
you certify yourself this way before anyone else does. People go
around telling you, ‘you have no substance in you,’ and you go
around trying to show that you are something, now how can it
work? Instead, just certify your own self as not having any
substance or competence and the problem will be solved.
The racecourse of life
When our construction contract business was recognized
as being number one in the area, a kind of power entered the
mind that my mind was working like a genius. However that too
was not akkal (wisdom, right intellect); on the contrary it was
foolishness. It was nothing but a museum of inviting troubles
(upadhi). Right intellect, wisdom is that which reduces external
problems (upadhi); it is where potential problems coming your
way gets diverted and end up going to someone else. They go
to someone else.
People’s methods are all wrong. The practices they use or
resort to for progress in life are also wrong. We ran around

Aptavani-9

393

according to other people’s methods and practices. We come
first and win but then we even come last too. I understood that
all this is nothing but betrayal indeed. I too had joined others in
the competition by entering the racecourse; I ran very hard and
after coming first, I then came in last. That is when I felt, ‘What
kind of madness is this? It is all a trap!’ You never know when
some unscrupulous person will destroy you. Do people not do
such things? One day you may be number one and the next day
such a person will come and make you puff and pant in the race
to no end. ‘We’ realized that a person can lose everything from
being number one and that one should not enter into such horse
races (competition).
‘We’ used to live very peacefully and in ease. Before the
roads used to be crooked; full of winding curves so inner
calculations would arise, as to which road was the shortest.
‘We’ never followed the paths everyone else followed. ‘We’
would try to look for short cuts. ‘Our’ method and practice was
different. ‘We’ never did anything just because other people did
it or because it was the traditional thing to do so. ‘Our’ method
and practice was completely different. I never painted the wall
in my house, if the wall were to get the paint on its own, then
so be it.
‘We’ say just one thing and that is, ‘there is no
competency (barkat) left in ‘us”. ‘We’ have seen the face of
competence! ‘We’ ran a lot! ‘We’ ran to no end! ‘We’ are
telling you from ‘our’ experiences of life after life, that all the
running of countless lives has been a failure and completely
worthless! I have run so hard, hard enough to be sitting on the
top but I have also suffered miserably in the process. Instead
why not run away form this racecourse! Let us discover our true
domain…it is, oh my…gigantic”!
So even if the devas (celestial beings) were to come
down and tell you, ‘We are giving you the first place in this

394

Aptavani-9

horse race’, you can tell them, ‘No, Dada has been there and
I believe him when he tells us about what he saw there and his
experiences. Thank you very much. I do not want such a
race.’
A relative of mine, while talking about money, tells me,
‘You have done well, you have made good money in the
business.’ I told him, ‘I really do not have any such thing; it is
you who has done very well. You have factories etc. How can
I compare myself to where you are at! I do not have the skills
you have; you have been able to accumulate so much wealth. I
do not know anything about this. I only know about the other
things (Self realization).’ There was nothing left to discuss any
further when I said that. There was nothing to compete, was
there? There was no relation left. Why would I want to enter
into competition (spardha) with them?
People are always competing in this way, but how can I
run with them? Let them win the prize. You just observe them.
What happens when you compete against them? You end up
hurting yourself so that is not for you.
The prize goes to the winner, the rest die
panting
If I am invited to a wedding of an acquaintance and I sit
in the middle, they will ask me to move and make room for
some ‘Jaichandbhai’ or other that comes along and then some
doctor or someone else will come along. I would get tired of
being moved around in this manner and end up sitting in the
back. So I stopped sitting in the front row altogether. I said to
myself, ‘I cannot afford to do this. I do not want to compete (for
a seat) with anyone. Only the winner takes the prize, others do
not.’ So then the host would come to me and tell me, ‘We have
kept a seat for you in the middle because you are the uncle.
Why did you not sit there? Why do you move around and stand
in the back? It does not look good for the order and pomp of

Aptavani-9

395

this wedding.’ I tell them, ‘No it does not look bad. People
know me and they understand that I am a man of God and that
I am not in tune with worldly things.’ But they would insist and
say, ‘No but it makes us look bad.’ So then I made one of them
understand, I told him, ‘Normally I would not say anything but
since you ask I will tell you the truth. If I were to sit in the middle
there, and if the jeweler Laxmichand were to come along, I
would have to move. Then I would have to move again when
Maganbhai Shankarbhai comes. So I have to keep changing my
seat, so instead of suffering insults this way, what is wrong in
simply standing here with dignity? I will not enter into
competition in such a racecourse. I am better off standing here
than sitting in the middle and taking the number nine seat and
feeling insulted.’ I did not say this directly to him, but I came to
the conclusion that only the horse that comes in first, wins the
prize and not others. I do not like such races. The one that
comes first gets the prize and others that run just as hard and
come in second and get nothing. So, he said, ‘That is very
shrewd of you.’ I told him, ‘Call it what you want but that is my
way.’ He said, ‘You have found a very shrewd way of getting
out of it.’
This is ‘our’ art of tackling all situations. ‘We’ do
everything; we eat, drink, and eat ice cream with leisure. I sit
back and ‘see’ which horse comes first. But I will not run in that
race. I will remain the knower and the seer (gnata drashta) of
the race. Why would I want to run with those horses?
Still, I did try it once. I have calluses on my feet from
when a nail had poked through the sole of my shoes. (Dada is
referring to his self-imposed penance that he subjected himself
to before Gnan. Following the philosophy of the Kramic path,
in search of the Soul, he thought physical penance was
necessary. When a nail in his shoe had poked through the inner
sole, he left it there, he endured it, entering the race course of
penance as seekers do in the Kramic path).

396

Aptavani-9

There is no winner when there is jealousy
Wherever you look there is a racecourse. All these
people have entered the racecourse. At home, there is a
racecourse even with the wife! If two bullocks are walking side
by side and one tries to get ahead of the other just a little, the
other will also exerts more.
Questioner: Why is that?
Dadashri: It is because they have entered the racecourse
(into competition). If the two are walking side by side and one
of them gets ahead a little, the one left behind will feel jealous
(irsha) and wonders how he can make him fall behind.
There is no winner in this race of jealousy (irsha). I do
not enter into such a race. It is a race where one will die huffing
and puffing without getting anywhere. Even the one who is full
of intellect will get exhausted and in his latter years of life will
accuse others, ‘He cheated me and the other fellow cheated me’
and on and on. Hey you! You got cheated even at the age of
eighty?! You will run in the racecourse for countless lives and
you will still be cheated at the end. This is how the world is.
Everything will go to waste and on top of that, you will also
suffer miserably in the process. Instead discover your rightful
place, your home of bliss, the Self and then run to it.
No one has been able to win the world and that is why
this discovery of ‘ours’ is very profound, it is one which allows
the world to win. Just say, ‘I sit here having lost but if you want
to win, then come here.’ This discovery will amaze the world
and ‘we’ have won the world through it. Otherwise, no one has
won it. Each of ‘our’ discoveries is such that they help the
world to win. This is Akram Vignan! The whole science is
Akram. This is not the case in the Kramic path. You can never
say that you have no competence and aptitude (barkat) in the
Kramic path.

Aptavani-9

397

This is Akram Vignan. One’s personality is apparent the
moment he exits the racecourse. Such a human being radiates
peace and harmony. Nobody running in the racecourse has any
personality.
Let others win
You have done nothing but the same thing over and over
again in countless past lives. Now it will change because of the
presence of Gnan, but not otherwise. This Gnan can show You
(the enlightened Self) your mistakes! And You will believe and
accept that the fault lies with you, whereas there (in the Kramic
path) you have to ask someone else. Besides, what competence
and aptitude does he have himself that he can show you? You
yourself must ‘feel’ that the fault is indeed yours. So there is no
need to win. ‘We’ have always maintained this. ‘We’ have never
kept the principle of winning. I would let others win and then
leave. And then I will forget about it. He too will get
preoccupied with something else. Now if I were to send him
away defeated, he will harbor the link (tanto) of kashaya and
not let go. So just let the other person win and let him go.
Questioner: Yes, ‘I lose and you win, my brother.’
Dadashri: You should not say this openly to him,
otherwise he will think, ‘Oh ho ho! He has calmed down. This
is great. This is how it should be.’
Questioner: What happens if you say this to him openly?
Dadashri: If you tell him this openly, he will start a
dispute (tante chaddhe), ‘I don’t want to win this way.’ One
man did tell me this once. I said to him, ‘Sir, I sit here defeated.
You have won so go home and sleep peacefully.’ He told me,
‘I do not want it this way.’ I said to him, ‘Do not try to extract
any sweetness out of this situation.’ This is how he enters into
a dispute (tant). If you say this, he will move that way, and if
you say that, he will move this way. The world is full of

398

Aptavani-9

objections and obstacles. Other people want to create objections
and obstacles whereas we remove whatever objections and
obstacles there may be.
Now you have to make Dada’s Gnan shine. However, if
after trying it does not shine, then so be it. If it does not, does
it mean you have to be adamant and persistent about it? Our
efforts should be positive. What can we do when circumstances
make them negative? Do you have to be obstinate about it? But
no, people continue to have tanto – a link of kashaya - wanting
to defeat others. The worldly play of win or lose! ‘We’ believe
it is a grave danger to defeat anyone. The defeated person will
then make preparation to defeat you. So why not let him win
and let him go? Will there be any problems then? There is no
problem from your end. Then he will look for someone else to
deal with. If he wins with you, he will go somewhere else and
compete.
So this Akram Vignan is very good, is it not? If you do
as Dada tells you, then you will become free from this ‘furnace’
of life. Remain ‘dramatic’ (superficial) from within and the
worldly interactions will be solved. People will show you a ‘red
flag’ (they will obstruct you) if you do not bring a solution in the
worldly interactions. This (Akram Vignan) is a clear path so no
one will show you a red flag. This Vignan is completely different.
There is no deceit (kapat) here about taking anything from
anyone. This fact is irrefutable. And here we do not keep
differences of ‘this is ours and that is not’; this too is an
irrefutable fact. So are there any problems here for us?
The Course of Akram Vignan
And this is Akram Science. It is completely different; it is
absolutely unique. How beneficial it is!
Questioner: What if one were to learn and then do it?
Dadashri: Yes, one will attain salvation if he learns ‘our’

Aptavani-9

399

words and follows them accordingly. He will attain salvation if
he learns even just one word of the Gnani Purush. Otherwise,
when will you progress from the third standard to the fourth?
Instead of that, Dada will place you in the first year after
matriculation. Other people are in the fifth and the sixth
standard. One will not pass even the third standard through his
own effort. Instead, do what Dada tells you and your problems
will be solved. Otherwise, these people are such that they will
drag you down into binding new karmas by telling you, ‘do this
for me, do that for me’. No one bothers to come here anymore.
Not even the neighbors. And they even say, ‘He is a very good
man.’ No one says I am a bad person.
So ours is a very good path. It is a path with solutions and
a safe side. Otherwise, it is difficult to go from the third to the
fourth standard if you follow other people (Kramic path) and do
what they do. No one has the capacity to do anything in the
current time cycle. Instead, here we are in the first year of
Dada’s Graduate College, so eat, drink and enjoy yourself.
Others do not but you all do. There is nothing for them to enjoy,
is there? They have to run around the whole day because they
have to win a prize.
This (college of Akram Vignan) is not something that you
take an admission into and not show up or finish up. This one
course will need to be finished. One has not finished this course
for infinite lives. If he had, he would become fearless (nirbhay).
Talks of such a feat are extraordinary, unique and out of this
world!

* * * * *

400

Aptavani-9

[7]
Insistence (khench) : deceit (kapat) :
‘point-man’ (the one who leads you astray)
The Science of Akram Vignan unravels all
entanglements
Everything I am saying is all through experience. If they
are not my own experiences then they are solutions that I have
‘seen’ through my Gnan. People need solutions, do they not?
Otherwise, without a solution one continues to suffer in
entanglements (goonch). People continue to experience turmoil
because they cannot find a solution. Everyone is in this state. So
what does one do when an entanglement (goonch) arises? This
world is nothing but a factory of entanglements and confusion.
“The world is the puzzle itself”, meaning it has puzzled itself.
That is why I am telling you that this is the Vignan
(science) of Akram. This Vignan has been given to people who
have not reached even its peripheral boundary; they were not
even qualified to receive it. Surely, it is their merit karma that
they have attained this Vignan. That is why ‘we’ have said, as
far as worldly interactions (vyavahar) are concerned make
Chandulal (the relative self) behave in such a way that he hurts
no one in the slightest; this that must be your inner goal and Your
constant inner intent.
When one is insistent, the Gnani becomes
silent
Questioner: Ordinarily what should our life be like after
attaining Dada’s Gnan?

Aptavani-9

401

Dadashri: You should live a life free from any insistence
(khench).
Questioner: Give me an example of how one is insistent,
please.
Dadashri: Suppose we are talking. I give you an answer
and in order to make your point correct you bring up the same
topic again. That is insistence (khench). This is what people do
over and over again. If you have taken Gnan, then there should
be no insistence. If there is any insistence, then get rid of it,
because it is a mistake. There is no problem if you try to get rid
of it and it does not go away. If there is continued insistence on
your part, if Chandulal is insistent, then You have to simply
observe it, by doing so, You are free. You are separate from
your insistence if you remain the seer (jonaro). Then you are in
compliance with ‘our’ laws.
Insistence (khench) is something very different. Insistence
means, if I say, ‘No, it is like this’ but you keep belaboring your
point in order to prove yourself correct, that is insistence. There
is no truth where there is insistence; insistence is one of the
biggest negative traits. The definition of being insistence-free is
if someone tells you, ‘I don’t like it’, then you say, ‘very well.
I will keep quiet’, there is no botheration.
Questioner: So if someone keeps arguing and tries very
hard to prove his point, does that mean he has no basis?
Dadashri: But even in those situations people do not
argue with awareness; people argue because they do not have
awareness. In fact, people argue because they lack awareness.
Do you think someone with awareness would argue?
Questioner: Is it wrong or right to argue?
Dadashri: It is fine for the worldly life; it is fine if you
want to do something for the worldly life, but it is wrong if you
want liberation. In the worldly life, if you don’t argue, people will

402

Aptavani-9

walk away with your things. But here in satsang, it is not
appropriate to argue. There is nothing to say in whatever the
Gnani tells you; arguing and discussions are only meant for the
worldly life. In the worldly life you may even have to say, ‘Dada,
do not go in this car, go in this one.’ But here in satsang?! What
wisdom, what over-wise people there are! ‘You are being overwise’, this is what I have to tell some people.
This is a Vignan. Many people tell me; ‘make laws, do
this, do that’ You fools! What kind of people are you that in
spite of attaining such a Vignan you have not become wise?
What a Vignan this is! A Vignan where there is no scope of
arguments!
Questioner: Rules and laws were the only way to
discipline people until now.
Dadashri: That is fine for people at large but ours is the
path of liberation. People who want to wander around in this
worldly life, they need laws. Otherwise, laws cause conflicts and
conflicts give rise to the worldly life.
Questioner: Are there not laws on the path of liberation?
Dadashri: No laws are needed on the path of liberation.
There are no laws here. Everything is natural. Whatever happens
naturally is correct.
Questioner: You said, ‘where there is liberation, there
are no laws; where there are laws there is no liberation.
Liberation is through absolute humility (param vinay).’ So
absolute humility encompasses everything, does it not?
Dadashri: Yes. Absolute humility encompasses everything.
With rules, one will be required to keep a tulsi plant (tulsi leaves
are used in prayer rituals in the Kramic path, they also have
medicinal properties). If a mouse nibbles away at the tulsi, he
will have to keep a cat to keep the mice away. The cat ruins the
milk and so he has to keep a dog to protect the milk. Where

Aptavani-9

403

does it end? Therefore, here we have the law of ‘no laws’. Here
we are applying Vignan and so the slightest of interference is
madness. It is tantamount to being over wise.
I will say things as they are. Then if someone were to
become obstinate and strong headed (jakki), then I will know
there is tremendous ignorance on his part and that he is harming
himself, so then I will not say anything more; I will remain silent.
If he starts arguing, it is because he cannot understand what I am
saying. Would he argue if he did?
So what is it like here in the satsang? You have to become
wise. You have to have param vinay, which means you do not
have to speak unnecessarily. Speak only when it is necessary.
Do not try to show your wisdom or your cleverness here. All
your cleverness is imitation; it is not original. Meaning you have
learnt from others, you have learnt from books. Then you get
into arguments and you do not stop. Don’t you even recognize
that you are going off on the wrong track, by doing this? To
engage in such confrontational arguments (chadasey chadhavu)
is to leave your own place as the Soul – your real Self and fall
all the way down; it is to lose your own place and to regress.
Questioner: You caution us right away before we fall.
Dadashri: I am telling you the same thing right now also.
But I cannot caution everyone; I can only tell certain people.
With others, I have to let things be. They have not attained the
energy (shakti) yet. The poor fellow will go away from here if
I were to say anything. I only caution those who have
understood what is harmful and what is beneficial to them as far
as liberation is concerned. So I only caution people once they
become strong. I will not say it to everyone. Otherwise, they will
leave right away; they will say ‘I’m leaving. I have a home. I
have a family. I am not desperate for anything. So why should
I stay here?’ ‘Yes, agreed you are married, you have everything.
You are fine as you are, but if you wander away from this

404

Aptavani-9

‘station’, you will never encounter it again, even after a hundred
thousand lifetimes.’ I have to pamper them like children in this
manner and make them sit. I even have to give them candies! I
ask you this, who has taken this Gnan with his own
understanding? I have had to coax and entice everyone, ‘Come
here! Come see!’ I have had to sweet-talk everyone in order to
give them Gnan.
There should be no insistence for that
Outside of satsang when people talk, it is natural for one
to feel, ‘ours is the right path. The path we have embarked upon
is the right path’. However, after attaining this Gnan, to feel that
way, the Lord has called it ahamkar - ego. That ego will have
to be rid of.
If someone outside of our satsang insults you and
degrades you, you will get drawn in into a confrontation. If he
instigates you into a confrontation with him (jakka), you will
even become obstinately confrontational. Once you enter into
obstinate confrontations, which inevitably becomes an interaction
of animosity (chadasey chadhavu), you become completely
immersed by illusion (mithyatva). Then the focused awareness
as and of the Self (upayog) is gone. All this will serve to spread
the illusion even further. This is a grave disease.
There is no such thing as the truth (satya) in this relative
world. The Real (sat) is eternal (avinashi). There is no other
sat. It cannot exist in the relative realm. Everything else is
relative and prone to come to an end (vinashi). And yet look
how people hang on to it with obstinacy!
To the Lord, there is no such thing as truth and untruth
(satya and asatya); these are man made concepts – they are
concepts of the human society. There are all kinds of people in
the society and so everything is dependant upon society. There
is no duality as far as the Lord is concerned. There is no profit
or loss. There are no such things as relationships either and I can

Aptavani-9

405

‘see’ this in my Gnan too. There is no relationship whatsoever.
Relationships are like the birds sitting on a tree. They fly in from
all direction; they stay together during the night and claim ‘we
must be somehow related’. So things continue this way in the
name of relationship but when the morning comes, they all fly
away in different directions. So there is no such thing as
relationships. No one is really related to anyone.
Questioner: The example of the passengers on a train on
a long journey is better, Dada.
Dadashri: On the train, one will at least realize that his
fellow passenger is suffering a lot, so he will try to help him. He
does not dwell on relationships and when his station comes, he
gets off.
It is also wrong (asatya) to hang on to the truth (satya).
To hang on to the truth’s tail (insist on the truth) is in itself untruth
(asatya). To become insistent is to ruin everything. People take
a beating by hanging on to the tail of the truth, just as they hang
on to a donkey’s tail. They will take a beating from the kicks but
they will not let go of the tail. They will insist ‘I will not let go’,
no matter what.
Whereas ‘we’ do not have any grasping of anything
(graha) or persistence of insistence (aagraha). There is not the
slightest insistence of ‘it has to be this way’ in any matter, not
even for a second. Not even for a second will ‘we’ say, ‘this is
right, this is true.’ There is not the slightest insistence of even
‘This Gnan has manifest.’ If you say, ‘that is incorrect’, even
then there is no insistence on ‘our’ part. Whatever comes
through your vision (drashti) is correct.
If you do not encounter any separation with anyone due
to difference of opinion (matbhed) anywhere, then know that
You are on the right path. And where there is separation due to
differences of opinions, know that your path is not clear yet. You
still have to carve your road through the mountains; you will

406

Aptavani-9

have to remove big rocks that come your way, otherwise you
are bound to crash into them if they are lying in your path.
Bring a closure by becoming straight (sarad)
The one who is straight (sarad) will flex and bend
according to the truth, will adjust promptly to the truth. Such a
one will quickly turn in matters where the ‘soul’ accepts and
agrees, and he will not be insistent there. The one who insists is
not sarad.
So do not be rigid, inflexible and insist on anything! It is
a grave liability to be persistently insistent (pakkad).
Questioner: Arguments are bound to ensue where there
is misunderstanding between two people.
Dadashri: Therefore you have to end the matter there.
Questioner: So if there is a misunderstanding and the
other person tells me ‘you are wrong’, should I not let go of it?
Dadashri: Yes, you should let go of it. What objection
do you have? If you don’t the other person will think, ‘Why is
he talking like that?’ I ask you, ‘is speaking (speech) not
vyavasthit? Is it not vyavasthit that he asks something?’ ‘We’
have all the solutions. Otherwise where is the end in sight? ‘We’
bring about a resolution quickly.
It is wrong of us to say, ‘this person is right and this
person is wrong.’ You just have to believe that the other person
is right and you are wrong and just move on. That way the other
person will not have any problems either. No one will have a
pending ‘claim’ against you. You can never be free if there are
any claims pending against you.
The ego after Gnan is lifeless and the
prakruti dissipates
Wherever there is the stock of ego (ahamkar no bharelo
maal), it is likely to increase. In the mahatmas the ego is

Aptavani-9

407

residual, it is a discharging ego (nikali ahamkar); it is not true
charge ego i.e. ego that charges new karmas. But even then one
goes on protecting and siding with it. Who are you to judge
what is right and what is wrong? This should not be so.
When one becomes adamant (jakka), it creates more
veils of ignorance over the soul. However, after this Gnan, all
that is left is the vyavahar i.e. only discharging worldly
interactions remain. As far as nischaya (the Self) is concerned,
jakka (insistence) is gone, dwesh (abhorrence) is gone, raag
(attachment) is gone; everything is gone. Now after Gnan, the
worldly life (vyavahar) is no longer chetan; it is no longer living
(there is no more karma bondage; it is all a discharge).
Vyavahar now has become achetan (it is inanimate); there is no
life in it. Achetan means that it will reignite if You instigate it
again (meaning if you become Chandulal again). Otherwise the
non-Self (prakruti) will show its traits and dissipate, nothing
more. Do you understand? It will manifest its trait; you will know
what it is like when it expresses. You can know and identify all
its traits. So different prakruti will express in different manner
and intensity, and thus the stock within (bharelo maal) becomes
evident. Then having expressed itself, it will dissipate.
The ego is rendered lifeless on the basis of this Akram
Vignan of ours. So sooner or later it is going to leave completely.
In the Kramic path the ego is alive whereas here in the Akram
path, it is lifeless; everything remains ‘dramatic’ - superficial.
The kashayas of anger, pride, deceit and greed, are all
‘dramatic’ also - they are superficial and lifeless. However the
kashayas that remain within now need to be dealt with, with
equanimity.
Deceit (kapat) and craftiness (chaturai)
If someone is verbally abusing one, in that too one’s
kashayas - inner passions of anger, pride, deceit and greed will
engulf him all over during that moment.

408

Aptavani-9

Questioner: How do these passions (kashayas) overcome
us?
Dadashri: They render you unconscious in regards to
awareness of Gnan. A person will not have any awareness at
that time!
Questioner: How can we tell when the kashayas have
arisen? What are the signs?
Dadashri: Will you not know when the ego has been
hurt? Deceit (kapat) is the main culprit that does not allow you
to be aware. This deceit means total darkness; complete
absence of awareness. In other forms of kashayas namely
greed, pride and anger, there would be some light; some
awareness.
Questioner: Please explain all these in detail. This deceit,
kashaya, ego…
Dadashri: These are all the obstacles in the path of
liberation.
Questioner: How does deceit operate and create a
puzzle in this?
Dadashri: Deceit (kapat), makes everything pleasant
and acceptable, and thus makes one wander (lose spiritual goal)
here, there and everywhere.
Questioner: Where again is the role of deceit in all these
wanderings?
Dadashri: Anger, pride, greed create fewer obstructions.
Deceit will create lot more obstructions. Deceit (kapat) does
not let one remain in the normality of worldly interaction; it takes
one below the level of what is normal, it is lower than the state
of worldly self (sansari). Persons without kapat are sarad; they
are straight and simple-hearted. Deceitful prakruti creates
major problems.

Aptavani-9

409

Questioner: If someone insults us, where is deceit
(kapat) in that?
Dadashri: There is no deceit (kapat) in that. Kapat
makes one take advantage of his own self. Deceit makes one
digs his own grave. In the four kashaya of anger-pride-illusion
and greed, illusion means deceit (the illusion deceives the self).
Deceit (kapat) has become an enormously dense mass within.
The karmic account that is created is verily of deceit.
Everywhere, deceit binds an account (new karma for which
repayment will have to make in the next life). Otherwise nothing
can bother you.
Now that I have given you this Gnan, kashayas will no
longer occur. People stray off in the direction of kashayas
because of their old habits (prior to Gnan) of wanting to ‘taste’
what’s going on. You will go and ‘taste’ it even when I tell you
not to. This Gnan is such that, deceit (kapat) will not survive in
anyone.
Questioner: This deceit prevents the awareness (jagruti)?
Dadashri: Anger-pride-greed also will not let you
maintain awareness. Deceit will make you completely unaware.
The owner (the one in whom deceit takes place) himself will not
know what deceit (kapat) has taken place. The owner (person
committing deception) himself will not know that he is employing
deceit!! However in instances of anger-pride-greed, he may be
somewhat aware. This deceit (kapat) is very deep; even the one
doing kapat (deceit) will not be aware that he is doing it.
Questioner: If the one doing kapat cannot tell that he is
doing kapat then how is he to recognize it? How can he be rid
of this fault if he cannot identify it?
Dadashri: This is hidden, not only from the doer of the
kapat, but everyone else around him too.
Questioner: How can one get rid of these faults of deceit
(kapat)?

410

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: It is very difficult.
Questioner: How can we know the nature of this deceit?
Dadashri: To pull others into your own opinion and take
them into your confidence for your worldly gains is kapat
(deceit). A person who is doing this would not even know that
he is doing anything wrong. He simply is not aware of it.
Questioner: What is included in the worldly gain? Is it
mainly everything other than the goal of salvation (moksha)?
Dadashri: There is definitely a goal of liberation after this
Gnan (knowledge of the Self). The problem is with the deeply
ingrained old habits (latta); they will not leave once they
become established. They cast a veil over the self and thus make
it difficult for the owner to know that they (the kashaya of
deceit) indeed exists within. The owner has no clue.
The owner is also not aware of the other kashaya of
greed (lobh) either. A greedy person will never know, ‘I am
greedy.’ Only the kashayas of pride (maan) and anger
(krodha) are guileless (bhoda), so one can easily know their
existence. One cannot identify maya - illusion that veils the Self;
this verily is deceit (kapat). He cannot know of greed either.
Questioner: So this deceit (kapat) is mainly for the
worldly benefits…
Dadashri: Deceit (kapat) is very tough; it is the greatest
nuisance. Now how can it leave by itself? It will leave if one
stops seeking advantage in worldly situations. Such a person is
liberated indeed, is he not?
Questioner: That verily is what we call awareness
(jagruti), do we not?
Dadashri: That is not jagruti; I just showed you the way
out of deceit (kapat).
Questioner: Awareness is to have an inner demarcation

Aptavani-9

411

between ‘this is for the worldly life and this is beneficial for
spiritual progress towards liberation’, is it not?
Dadashri: That is called awareness. But that kind of
awareness will not prevail at all. It is only in the absence of
awareness that deceit (kapat) takes over. Nevertheless, the
deeply ingrained old habit (latta) has to be fractured, does it
not? The habit! The latta (habitual compulsion) to enjoy worldly
pleasures!
Questioner: Does one not need to turn that habit
around? How can this habit be broken?
Dadashri: The compulsive habit (latta) is there for sure.
Now one needs to get rid of it; settle with it.
Questioner: How?
Dadashri: That habit will begin to leave the moment you
decide and say, ‘I do not need anything. I have all the happiness
I need.’ That latta will change the moment you decide, ‘I do not
want anything’.
Questioner: What all is included in relative worldly
benefits?
Dadashri: Everything! One meddles (behaves as
Chandulal) when he is sitting in a train; he meddles when he is
sitting in a bus. Everywhere you look, he is meddling.
Questioner: What kinds of situations are applicable there
for the mahatmas who have taken Gnan?
Dadashri: Every situation. It is exactly the same situation
he has come from (from past life). Everything (karma bondage)
has become solid and that is exactly what is bearing fruits
(effect) right now. If you remain in your jagruti and do not
‘taste’ these fruits or even if you ‘taste’ them but remain
separate as the Self from the non-Self (Chandulal), then you
have succeeded. Those fruits are sweet, are they not? That is

412

Aptavani-9

why one is not able to remain separate. He will taste it (get
involved as Chandulal), will he not? It is very difficult to rise
above deceit (kapat). Deceit is the only dangerous thing. The
kashayas of anger-pride-greed can be rid of but it is tough to
get rid of kapat (deceit).
Questioner: So the worldly gains, its sweetness, kapat
always remains with us. So then the difficulty of becoming free
from it will inevitably remain.
Dadashri: Awareness (jagruti) will help. Along with this
awareness, the decision and the nischaya (firm resolve) of, ‘I
do not want anything,’ will help.
Questioner: So one has to make the firm resolve
(nischaya) of ‘I do not want anything except for moksha
(liberation)?’
Dadashri: Yes, ‘I do not want anything at all’. ‘I do not
want anything,’ whatever may come along, such a nischaya
(resolution) will be necessary.
Questioner: In other words, once the decision for
moksha is made, the train will get on the right track?
Dadashri: The decision for moksha has already come
but along with that the decision of, ‘I do not want this,’ has to
come also, does it not?
That is why I have instructed everyone to recite this
sentence five times every morning: ‘I do not want anything in this
world’. The effect of it will then remain for the rest of the day.
Questioner: So if we are to examine in every situation as
to ‘what he (the relative self) wants and where he is at’, then we
can become free quickly, can we not?
Dadashri: Yes, but how will deceit (kapat) leave with an
analysis? There is craftiness and cleverness (chaturai) within, is
there not?

Aptavani-9

413

Questioner: What kind of craftiness is it? Can you
please explain this chaturai?
Dadashri: There is craftiness and cleverness (chaturai)
in deceit. With whomever there is interaction of deceit; one will
win over the other person through craftiness and cleverness. He
will win over everyone through chaturai; only the Gnani will not
fall under this spell. He will be able to get other people under
his control. He employs craftiness with everyone; he knows how
to do all that.
Questioner: What should an individual who is being
crafty do in order to become free from it?
Dadashri: How will he know this? He will not be able to
know this at all. One cannot escape from his own craftiness.
You should not become a victim of that craftiness and cleverness
(chaturai).
Questioner: Does that mean it is the prakruti (the nonSelf complex) that practices craftiness and cleverness?
Dadashri: The other person’s prakruti does craftiness
and cleverness because of kapat because he wants to engage
his craft of kapat to trap others. But you have to be cautious
if you do not want to be influenced by his kapat.
Questioner: How?
Dadashri: To begin with you should know how to listen
keeping in mind whether something is beneficial or harmful to
you. Ordinarily people accept sweet words that are harmful to
them and reject bitter one that are for their own benefit.
Questioner: But whether the other person is telling me
for my benefit or my detriment…
Dadashri: It is more than enough if you understand just
this much. If you are at this level, it is more than enough.
Questioner: But after all, benefits or harm is applicable

414

Aptavani-9

to the worldly life is it not? Should we not recognize whether it
has spiritual or worldly implications?
Dadashri: It is always worldly; it is never for the Self, is
it? It is always related to the pudgal the non-Self. It is only
when that (the importance of the non-Self) moves aside that one
can attain the Self.
Questioner: One will not be victim of his craftiness and
cleverness (chaturai) if he understands whether it is beneficial
or harmful to him.
Dadashri: One does understand what is beneficial and
what is harmful but he does not understand whether craftiness
and cleverness (chaturai) is present or not. He is not able to
know because to begin with, he has the habit of ‘tasting
sweetness’. The minute someone calls out to him, ‘welcome!
Welcome’, he loses all awareness. No matter how much you tell
‘us’, ‘welcome…welcome!’ ‘we’ will not become a victim of
this deceit (kapat).
Questioner: There is no worry if there is a nischaya
(strong decision) for moksha! Then his words will not affect or
touch us!
Dadashri: The nischaya for moksha is there for sure, but
there is a lot of interference (dakhal – interference of becoming
‘Chandulal’) in between also, is there not? ‘Keval nij swabhav
nu akhand varte Gnan – Only a continuous awareness as the
Self prevails.’ The nischaya is there for sure, but will it not have
to prevail continuously? Moksha prevails, but it will have to
prevail constantly, without interruption, will it not? Interruptions
will not do.
Questioner: But whether something is beneficial or
harmful, after all it falls in the worldly department - the relative
department; does it not?
Dadashri: Yes, but it is verily the worldly things that one

Aptavani-9

415

needs to let go. There is nothing like that on the path to
moksha. What else? You have to let go of all the harmful
worldly things.
One will understand this if he tries to and if he does not
have a habit of ‘tasting sweet things’.
Questioner: Now if one is being crafty (chatur), how
can he get rid of his own craftiness and cleverness (chaturai)?
Dadashri: He is not able to recognize his craftiness and
cleverness himself and he will not believe you even if you were
to tell him that he is being crafty.
Questioner: It can be very difficult to follow the path of
moksha and become free from this fault of deceit (kapat).
Dadashri: It is not difficult. You will be able to reach
your goal by maintaining your intent (bhavna) to be rid of this
fault. It will not take long for the one who wants to get rid of
these faults. It cannot be difficult, can it? Everyone has such
deceit (kapat). In the current time cycle, where can such deceit
(kapat) be absent?
Questioner: Kapat is involved in dealing with another
individual but when it comes to one’s own prakruti and Atma
(the Self), kapat is at work there too, is it not?
Dadashri: No, not in that.
Questioner: The other person may be being crafty
(chaturai), but if he finds ‘sweetness’ in that then is kapat not
at play there?
Dadashri: No, that is not considered kapat. That poor
man is likely to get fooled. He has a habit of ‘tasting sweetness’
and that is why he gets fooled.
Questioner: Awareness (jagruti) does not remain at that
time, does it?

416

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: Awareness will not remain at that time. When
someone greets you with respect and says, ‘welcome, welcome
Chandulal’ the effect of the sound of those words is such! And
if someone tells you, ‘you do not have any sense’ then what
effect will such words have on you?
Questioner: This Akram Vignan is such that first it will
not let the effect of those words touch the Self (the soul within).
There arises within the awareness as to whom the words,
‘senseless’ are being addressed to.
Dadashri: Yes. First such awareness arises. Then nothing
will affect You once this awareness arises. The one who
becomes aware as to who is being addressed in, ‘welcome,
welcome,’ remains unaffected. (This respectful greeting is being
given to Chandulal, the relative self and this is the awareness—
jagruti). You have to extract and attain such subtle understanding.
Questioner: This is very necessary. The breakdown in
the continuity of this awareness occurs, and is that the reason
that all such faults take over the control?
Dadashri: All these faults cause the intervening
breakdown. That is why the Lord has said, ‘Keval nij swabhav
nu akhand varte Gnan—the uninterrupted bliss of the Self is
being experienced.’ But it does get interrupted. Therefore stop
the habit of tasting sweetness (of respect) and it is unlikely that
anyone will go out of his way to serve you anything bitter
(insult). This is because your worldly interaction now is such that
no one will insult you, and if it does happen then know that as
your vyavasthit—scientific circumstantial evidence. The fault is
of the sufferer.
Questioner: The awareness prevails stronger during
bitter and unpleasant life effects.
Dadashri: That is why one becomes deluded at the time
of tasting sweetness; enjoying the pleasant life effects.

Aptavani-9

417

Now an uninterrupted awareness of Gnan will be
experienced when there is no objection or interference (with
reference to painful or pleasant life effects) of any kind. This
path is of uninterrupted awareness - akhand jagruti.
‘Point-man’ on the path of liberation
The thing here is that there will be many ‘point-men’ (men
in charge of switching railway lines) on the spiritual path. So if
we are on the train that we think will take us to Delhi, will have
been switched somewhere on the way and we end up at the
wrong destination. Therefore adhere to the destination from our
– the Gnani’s - point only. There is likely to be so many pointmen here.
If the train is traveling on the main line i.e. on the right
track you will not be robbed (of the great spiritual state received
from the Gnani). You will be robbed if the track changes and
thereafter there is no telling where you will end up. Therefore do
not ever place your trust in a point-man (the one who will throw
you off your path). If you start drinking tea with him (start
trusting him), and continue the pleasantry, he will switch your
track.
Questioner: Who is considered a point-man on our path
of liberation (moksha)?
Dadashri: A point-man is one who says things that
pleases you. If someone talks to you and makes you ‘dizzy’
(makes you lose your senses) with his sweet talks, then you
should know that the point-man has arrived. He says things that
please you and then the mind gets caught up in it and takes over.
Therefore, a point-man will switch your train on to the wrong
tracks with the same speed, without you being aware of the
switch. Later, if someone asks you, ‘Oh, why are you on this
wrong path?’ You will reply, ‘I can never be on the wrong path!’
Questioner: Is that why the Lord has said to remain
continuously under the shelter of the Gnani?

418

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: Yes, that is why. Otherwise you will meet a
point-man in every situation who will change your track in no
time. On top of that, what will he say? ‘Mine is the Rajdhani
Express; it is the fast track train from Mumbai to Delhi.’ Oh, but
your track has changed! Rajdhani! Who says it is not the
Rajdhani but if it is running on the main track only then it is the
‘Rajdhani Express’ (it will reach your destination fast). If the
track has changed then where will it take you? You will not
reach Delhi.
We should exercise great care to ensure that our ‘main
line’ (goal of liberation) is not switched. All these are old habits,
are they not? So far we have not got rid of the old habits. We
should know that they are old habits.
Questioner: If a person is very strong and firm in his
nischaya -resolve to remain the Self after Self-realization - then
his vyavahar (worldly interactions) of the relative self will
become very beautiful and harmonious, will it not?
Dadashri: Vyavahar must become pleasant and
harmonious; the nischaya will weaken if it does not. If the
worldly interactions do not improve, it would weaken one’s
resolve to remain as the Self.
Questioner: How does one gauge this? What is the
gauge to check whether one is on the wrong track or the right
one?
Dadashri: Firstly there arises the pleasure of the ego and
the sweetness of the wrong track and therein he continues to
become emotional (expresses raag and dwesh; attachment and
abhorrence), whereas on the main line, there always prevails
nirakudata - transcendence of pleasure and pain, state beyond
easiness and uneasiness; the bliss of the Self. On the other track,
this nirakudata leaves and is replaced by uneasiness which
becomes evident in one’s thoughts and facial expression. If he
rides on the wrong track, he will lose the bliss of the Self.

Aptavani-9

419

Questioner: When can we say that the mistake has been
fractured?
Dadashri: If you understand it in systematic details then
it can be said that the mistake has been fractured. This means
you understand and know the answers to, ‘how the mistake
occurred’. What was the beginning of the wrong track? What
happened initially? What was the underlying reason for it?’ If
you unearth the answers to all this from within, then know that
the mistake has been fractured. You will know what happened
and on what basis it occurred. Where did the mistake find its
support and where did you become emotional. From what point
did nirakudata leave? All this can be known.
Questioner: In life, when worldly interactions are taking
place, there is no aim or a persistent preference of taking one
way or the other. There is no insistence that we should go this
way or that way in whatever is unfolding in the daily life.
Otherwise in nischaya - in matters of the Self - there is no
deviation or slippage.
Dadashri: There is always an inevitable slippage in
nischaya (the state of the Self) once there is slippage in
vyavahar. It may seem to you that there is no slippage from the
Self. The mind may give you false impressions of, ‘nothing has
been disturbed in the nischaya’, but if the relative worldly
interaction becomes unsteady (being on the wrong track), then
understand that nischaya has slipped and become unsteady for
sure. Beware of this one critical point!
When the track is never switched then it is correct. No
one dare switch it. When one is not so gullible as to be
influenced by what others say, then it is correct. So many people
come and tell me all kinds of things but I remain unmoved. I do
not let their talks sway me.
Questioner: When you talk about not becoming swayed
by anyone, what are you primarily talking about?

420

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: Samyak (the real and the right; the state of the
Self). I would investigate what is samyak in it. And then I would
cancel it. After that even if someone tries to instigate it further,
he will not get any response. Many people do say, ‘Dada is
bhoda (guileless).’ But try me out! (Test me!) Dada is the
absolute Self; He cannot be guileless. How can He ever be
bhoda? Would He be guileless? If a Gnani Purush is guileless
then what is the difference between him and a stupid person?
Do you have the ability to analyze this talk? Are you able
to critically appreciate this line of conversation that you are
involved in?
Questioner: One can realize after a lot of experience.
Dadashri: The person who tells you things (the one who
is instrumental in switching the tracks) would not have any
deceitful aggression (prapanch); he is simply speaking out of
idiocy (unaware of the reality of this universe). If that were to
happen to me, there would be a major problem in satsang,
would it not? What is the likelihood of Dada ever believing you
if you were to tell me, ‘Dada this is what happened’?
Questioner: With what adjustment do you not accept
things people tell you?
Dadashri: I would know right away. It’s value and
validity; I can understand everything. I would know from the
moment he starts talking that he is being partial and is trying to
make me take sides. If the Gnani Purush were to become naïve,
then all is lost. He may look guileless (bhoda) and simple. How
can one who does not have trace of deceit (kapat) be guileless
(bhoda)? Where there is guilelessness (bhodpan), there is
deceit (kapat) for sure. Where there is no deceit there is not an
iota of bhodpan.
Questioner: So does guilelessness (bhodpan) exist on
the foundation of deceit (kapat)?

Aptavani-9

421

Dadashri: Foolishness prevails on the foundation of
deceit. When deceit (kapat) leaves foolishness will not remain
either.
Questioner: What is the nature of that deceit (kapat)?
What kind of deceit is that?
Dadashri: It is deceit of all kinds! Deceit means to keep
everything hidden from the Self, to veil the Self. All kinds of
deceit of taking advantage of someone, to keep one’s things
secret from others; that is also deceit!
Questioner: So what is one trying to hide all this from?
Dadashri: One employs deceit to hide things about him
or his business from others. If he is talking in confidence with a
person, and someone enters the room, would he not stop
talking?
Questioner: Yes, he would.
Dadashri: What can be the reason for that?
Questioner: Is that considered deceit?
Dadashri: Then what else can you call it?
Questioner: So where is guilelessness in this?
Dadashri: Wherever there is kapat (deceit), there is
bound to be bhodpan (guilelessness) also on the other side.
Kapat would not arise if one does not have this much
foolishness. Deceit is a sign of foolishness. Guilelessness exists
where deceit exists. And where there is guilelessness, you
should take it for granted that deceit is there.
Questioner: You said that our track should not change.
Our track has not changed, so what should be our goal of this
track?
Dadashri: The goal of moksha; liberation, salvation!
What other goal is there? That is the main line!

422

Aptavani-9

Questioner: And if the goal changes then what other
kind of goal would arise?
Dadashri: One moves very quickly in the opposite
direction of moksha; it will take no time! And he would feel, ‘I
am indeed on the path of liberation.’
Questioner: What kind of a mistake remains there?
Dadashri: That verily is this kapat and ‘foolishness’. Can
one not distinguish between what is right and what is wrong after
listening to others? Is one not able to differentiate what is correct
and what is incorrect?
Questioner: How can one develop understanding of
what is correct and what is incorrect?
Dadashri: Such understanding will not come until deceit
leaves. When whatever I tell you, begins to ‘fit’ (is absorbed),
then you are on the right track. We know that you will reach the
goal once this happens.
Questioner: What are the signs that one is on the right
path; on the main line?
Dadashri: Deceit should go away.
Questioner: Please explain more about this deceit
(kapat).
Dadashri: Everyone will know for sure ‘there is deceit
here and elsewhere’. Guilelessness (bhodpan) also exists there.
If someone tells him something and if guilelessness exists within
him, he will take that information to be true and run with it. If
someone were to tell him, ‘so and so just died’, he will believe
it and start crying but he will not stop to inquire who exactly
died. Do not take even the words of your own father as the truth
because he speaks from his perspective and level of
understanding. There is no deceit in that; people just say things
from the lack of correct understanding.

Aptavani-9

423

Questioner: Except for the Gnani, does everyone not
say things only according to their own viewpoints?
Dadashri: Indeed. It is always through only their
viewpoint. It is all right if that viewpoint is correct. However, it
is correct by his understanding only. In these situations, you
simply have to listen, agree, and pass your days! Otherwise
nothing is attained, only that part which is true is attained.
Questioner: I did not quite understand your statement,
‘there you have to listen, agree and pass your days…’
Dadashri: You should not ‘obstruct’ (oppose; challenge
him) what he tells you. You have to accept and listen as if you
believe it to be the truth. You have to listen in this manner. The
rest is in your hands, is it not? Your focus and basis should be
on what is real (samyak); on the right vision and understanding
that I have given you. Just keep an eye on which direction the
pointer of samyak is pointing. Your sincerity is limited to the
extent of your listening and not beyond that. You should not
obstruct him nor create any obstacles for him.
Everyone speaks in his or her own language (bhasha;
viewpoint or understanding), do they not? Even I will say that
whatever he says is correct in his own ‘language’. But it would
not ‘fit’ - be in concert with my language.
Questioner: How is it with your bhasha (inner language)?
What is that constant shuddha upayog (pure awareness as the
Self)?
Dadashri: That you have never seen or heard before,
have you?
Questioner: Please tell us something about it…
Dadashri: No, it cannot be put in words. It is the matter
of experience only. That stage will arrive by itself. Currently for
you there is spiritual insight (sooj) working at the gross

424

Aptavani-9

superficial (sthool) level. The other is at the subtlest
(sookshmatam) level. And everyone communicates in his or her
own language (bhasha), do they not? You may understand at
the subtlest level and the other person is speaking at the gross
level. Now how will he understand the subtlest level? He will of
course speak at the gross level, will he not?
This Gnan that you have heard from me will keep working
for you. You are listening about the knowledge of the path that
I have taken, and that path will continue working for you. All
you have to say is, ‘Dada we want to follow your foot steps,’
and thereafter I will show you my entire path to you.
There is no problem once you are on the main line, is
there? The solution is there even for the one who realizes that
the train had taken the wrong path. The problem is when one
continues on a path without knowing where it is leading. Such
a person simply thinks he has made no mistakes.
Questioner: And he even believes it!?
Dadashri: Yes, and on top of that he protects his
mistakes. But it is indeed your own fault to see anyone’s fault.
He has to see his own fault. What right does anyone else have
to see his fault? One becomes a judge, without any purpose.
Why utter anything before even knowing whether a mistake
has been committed? It is out of self-interest that one says
anything. What is the proof that the mistake is indeed of the
other person?
Therefore this Vignan; this spiritual science will verily
eradicate all the mistakes. Otherwise any other science cannot
get rid of the faults. This kind of an opportunity will not come
again. Hence it is best to proceed with caution, having been
forewarned.
You should not evaluate your own level of spiritual
progress within your mind as it will impede and halt your

Aptavani-9

425

progress. One should not assess his own spiritual level. It is of
use if others do this for him.
Questioner: What kind of level in the mind are you
referring to?
Dadashri: In this very path of liberation, everyone has
deduced his or her own spiritual level. And that deduction is
completely wrong; there is absolutely no truth in it. Once a
person makes the assessment of his or her level, they become
stuck there. There is no further spiritual progress.
You are all at a stage where it will not take much to
deviate from the path and slip off the main track. Amidst such
rampant weaknesses, you need full and thorough understanding
in order to progress spiritually towards total enlightenment
(purnatva). In all this, first deceit (kapat) must leave.
All the energies are wasting away in pursuit of what is not
ours; in the pursuit of the relative; the non-self.
Questioner: And that is the very thing, which is being
covered up with kapat.
Dadashri: Yes, that is the very thing that is covered up
again. Nothing belongs to us; the real Self, yet one takes side of
the non-Self. Hey you! You have already decided (in Gnan
Vidhi) that nothing is yours, but even then you become partial
towards the non-Self (Chandulal). Then he says, ‘oops, I
forgot.’
Questioner: Which is it, does he forget or is he still not
free from taking the side of the relative self?
Dadashri: He has not become free from taking the side
of the relative. He will just say he forgot for that moment but it
is not easy to become free from being partial.
So beware, beware all the time; you need to have
tremendous awareness.

426

Aptavani-9

Questioner: That is correct. Today the resolution has
been made to adhere to the path of liberation. However until
one understands with clarity the distinction between the supporting
and the obstructing causes of liberation, it seems very difficult to
make this ‘train’ hold a steady course that will end in complete
enlightenment.
Dadashri: If you use the word difficult, then you will not
be able to achieve anything. Therefore, say ‘Dada you have
given us such a Vignan – such a spiritual science that indeed
there is no difficulty at all!’
‘What do I care?’ (‘Maarey shoo?’)
After I gave you this Gnan, did your Atma leave? It never
goes away on any given day, does it? What is this Atma like?
There is no atma in the worldly life, because the Atma - the Self
never experiences hurt. Whereas people get and feel hurt all the
time, therefore it cannot be the Atma. The Atma does not feel
any insults. If you feel insulted, then it cannot be the Atma. Will
you not have to settle the account of your karmic files that are
pending? If you walk away with the attitude, ‘What do I care?’
does it mean that You have become free? Those files will
continue the entanglements in their minds, ‘Let him go, he is
always like that’ they will say. Do you think that people will set
you free just because you say, ‘What do I care?’ So become
agreeable and blend in.
Questioner: But Dada everyone nowadays take the
approach of ‘What do I care?’
Dadashri: It is very dangerous for one to say, ‘What do
I care?’ ‘Maarey shoo?’ ‘What do I care?’, how can anyone
even make such a statement? These words are very inappropriate.
‘What do I care?’ what kind of a person are you to say
something like this? These words ‘What do I care?’ should not
even exist.

Aptavani-9

427

‘We’ have never said ‘What do I care?’ Even being a
Gnani Purush, ‘we’ cannot say that, in any situation. ‘We’
cannot say it even when someone comes here under any
predicament or situation.
One woman in our extended family had passed away and
her son came to give me the news. He told me, ‘I had to come
here to give you the news personally.’ I told him, ‘Son, you
inform me now and it is very late in the day, is it not?’ So he
told me, ‘No Dada. You do not have to come home.’ Even so
I still went to his home for a few minutes, came home and also
took a bath afterwards (a normal tradition). So the approach of
‘What do I care?’ is not acceptable in the worldly life. The
worldly interactions (vyavahar) must be carried out as worldly
interactions are meant to be. You are not going to lose your soul
by doing so.
It is the gravest mistake to say, ‘What do I care?’ These
words are never to be found in ‘our’ dictionary at all. These
words cannot be uttered in your home, outside or here in the
satsang. ‘What do I care?’ is this something one should even
utter? If one does, that ego will never go away. That ego
becomes solid. Then it will never leave. It will not break, ever.
People make the statement, ‘what do I care?’ even when
it involves their sister, brother or mother.
Questioner: What does this inner intent of ‘What do I
care?’ towards anyone, indicate?
Dadashri: Worthlessness! ‘What do I care?’ How can
anyone even utter such a statement? You have taken birth in
their home and you say ‘What do I care?’ It is a grave fault. You
must never say this. Not only can you not say this in your own
home but you cannot say it elsewhere either. These are all grave
faults.
Questioner: What kind of a fault is it?

428

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: It is not even the correct ‘paper’ so what is
the point of looking for a mistake when the paper is not correct
in the first place? We can consider the mistakes and faults if the
paper is correct, but when one says ‘What do I care?’ - that
paper is not correct; it is wrong, it is one hundred percent
wrong!
Questioner: You have said, ‘To say, ‘What do I care?’
is a violation in the eyes of God as well as nature.’
Dadashri: That person is guilty all over. There is nothing
else left for him as far as mistakes and liability is concerned.
When his paper is not even worth reading what is the point of
looking for mistakes? When do we consider mistakes? It is
when one’s paper has any worth. But here the paper is
worthless so what is the point in looking for mistakes? One
takes on the gravest liability when he says, ‘What do I care?’
Questioner: How can we get out of the entrenchment of
the attitude of ‘what do I care?’ that has taken hold form within?
Dadashri: ‘What do I care?’ It is the lowest degree there
is and the way to get out of it is to walk back the path that lead
you in that wrong direction; you have to use that same path in
order to come out of it.
Questioner: So what did you say we had to do in turning
back? What has to be done on the way back?
Dadashri: The road that brought you here is the road
that will take you back. How do I know which way you went
in? You know which path you took. Go back the way you came
and it will go away.
Questioner: So what does one do in that?
Dadashri: You do pratikraman over and over.
Questioner: Does infatuation (aasakti) not decrease by
saying, ‘What do I care?’ Does excessive aasakti not go down
by saying this?

Aptavani-9

429

Dadashri: Oh, leave alone all talks of lowering infatuation
(aasakti), this goes way beyond aasakti and it destroys people.
All the ascetics (bavas) have been destroyed by their attitude of
‘What is it to me?’ ‘What do I care?’ ‘What is it to me?’ You
can never say this.
‘What do I care?’ means nispruha – to be without
inclination. You either become spruhi (with inclination) or
become like the Gnani Purush, who is nispruhi – free from
inclination where the body is concerned - but has spruha complete inclination for the Self. So become saspruhi-nispruhi,
meaning inclined towards the Self and disinclined towards the
non-Self. So remain as one or the other. But do not become
completely disinclined (nispruha) without realizing the Self,
otherwise you will become like a stone. You cannot say, ‘What
do I care?’
To say ‘what do I care?’ is the entrapment of the intellect
(buddhi) What will the intellect not trap one in? And when one
says, ‘what do I care?’ - it is the intellect that traps him into
taking that approach. Nevertheless, for some people, this
attitude has become natural and a spontaneous (sahaj) trait and
when they say ‘what do I care?’ they speak without their
intellect, without thinking. If they speak through the medium of
their intellect, then it is not a spontaneous, (sahaj) statement.
So what should the person for whom this has become a
spontaneous trait do? He still has to get out of it. That is why
‘we’ change the main line here. Thereafter ‘we’ show him which
line he should remain on. The other line is useless; it was
completely wrong and so you have to get rid of it. ‘We’ put in
another ‘railway line’ for you so you can keep your train on that
line.
Questioner: We have to remain very clear and sure from
within, that we do not miss this path of liberation.
Dadashri: Do not lose your path. And it is not possible

430

Aptavani-9

to deliberately lose that path, it only happens unknowingly. No
one will deliberately lose the path of liberation.
The deception that deludes and throws one
off the track of liberation
If you get into an argument with someone in the presence
of a third person, when you meet that third person again, would
you not ask him what the other person you argued with was
saying about you after you left?
Questioner: Yes, that happens. What is it called?
Dadashri: Such a thing will completely throw you off the
path of liberation. ‘What was he saying about me?’ if such need
to know remains within, it can ruin your path of liberation.
Questioner: How come? Why is that so?
Dadashri: It is a very treacherous and an awfully wrong
path.
Questioner: But in that situation which element (tattva)
is playing a role?
Dadashri: Why do you have to ask such a question? Is
one a thief (did something wrong) that he needs to ask, ‘what
he was talking about me?’ He has no faith in himself that is why
he has to ask someone, ‘what was he saying about me, after I
left?’
Do I ever keep a watch behind me asking, ‘what was he
saying behind my back?’ I do not have any problems regardless
of what he says about me. I am unaffected even if he were to
say it right to my face. A person asks this because there is
kapat (deceit) within.
Questioner: Is that also called kapat (deceit)?
Dadashri: Yes, That is why he is asking the third person,
‘what was he saying after I left?’

Aptavani-9

431

Questioner: Or is it called the ego?
Dadashri: How can you say it is the ego? It is all done
to hide things about one’s self. The one who does not have
anything to hide does not care about what the world says about
him. Do you think such a person goes around asking, ‘what
were they saying about me?’ Say whatever you have to say
about ‘us’, say it in ‘our’ presence. ‘We’ would worry only if
‘we’ had something to hide, would ‘we’ not?
Why not say it in ‘our’ presence? Therefore ‘we’ do not
inquire to see what people might be saying behind ‘our’ back.
People can create whatever types of ‘echoes’ they want to (say
whatever they want to). The poor man is saying so from his own
understanding. Does he understand all this? All he knows is how
to eat, and even then he makes a mess while eating!
Questioner: Indeed, when you explain with such clarity,
that this is a huge stumbling block, then we understand.
Dadashri: You should make yourself (your relative self)
such that nothing anyone says behind your back, no matter how
hurtful, will affect you even in the slightest from within.
Arey! Are you aware that people even eavesdrop on
conversations too! What kind of worthless people are these? If
others talk about you, you must be at fault somewhere, would
you not? If someone is talking about you, it is because there may
be some fault in you, is that not so? Otherwise, who is there to
blame you? And how unworthy of you to listen in on that which
is not meant for your ears! If someone were to see you
eavesdropping, how terrible would that person feel? It is a
terrible fault.
Let the whole world talk if they want to. Many people tell
me, ‘Dada, this is what they were saying about you.’ I tell them,
‘That is fine. They are saying good things.’ Then they tell me,
‘They are also printing it in the newspapers.’ I tell them, ‘So

432

Aptavani-9

much the better if they print it in the newspaper. On the
contrary, at least people will get to know this Dada now, will
they not?’ I would be concerned and have fear only if the fault
were to exist within me. So let the world bray; what effect can
it have on the one who is strong?
Questioner: How is it for the one who has made a
resolute decision (nischaya) never to deviate from this path?
Dadashri: That nischaya (resolution) has been made,
but along with this he also has a desire for a worldly goal, does
one not? That is a fault; that is one fault. There still lie many such
faults within. One will need to get rid of all these faults, right?
Therefore, you should not care about what others say
behind your back. Otherwise it confirms that you are at fault.
Why did you make the mistake of listening secretly? It is
because you are the guilty one, is that not so? Will you not have
to understand this? How long can you go on like this? What do
you think about all this? Here one wants liberation but at the
same time, he continues being the way he was in his worldly life.
How can the two exist simultaneously?
Therefore, is it not critical to understand this point too?
You can never predict how life will unfold in front of you,
however if you have such weaknesses within, should they not be
destroyed?
What can happen when forces that destroy your goal,
arise? Do you know what a tiniest mistake that you cannot
detect can do? It can completely delude you. Once deluded,
what huge mistakes one commits! Then the raging ego will take
over.
Therefore, one should not try to listen in on someone’s
private conversation with the intent of knowing ‘What are they
saying about me?’ And why the interest in this?! It is because
of one’s own deceit (kapat). Deceit will never help you; not

Aptavani-9

433

even a little. And if someone brings you some talk that he has
heard about you, that person becomes close and dear to you.
Questioner: What can we say about the state of the
person who brings such information to us?
Dadashri: You should not let him touch (affect) You at
all.
Questioner: No, I do not mean that. Just as we say the
one who listens secretly has kapat in him, what do we call the
person who brings us such talks?
Dadashri: The messenger is interested in creating a rift
between the two parties. He is deeply rooted in the pleasure this
creates for him.
Questioner: That verily is his kapat (deceit) too, is it
not?
Dadashri: Yes, it is all kapat too! He is searching for a
certain pleasure in it. He has some kind of interest in it.
Questioner: Is there kapat involved where one is
looking for pleasure?
Dadashri: Then what else would be there? One just has
to ‘smell’ it! All he needs is to get a whiff of it. He will say to
himself, ‘I have to tell him, I have to tell him about the other
person.’ Such is this whiff!
Questioner: What is the vision (drashti) of the one who
is walking on the path of liberation (moksha-marg)? What is his
constant understanding?
Dadashri: You will not achieve anything by me telling you
all that. One has to know about one’s own deceitful intent
(kapat bhaav) and however much he becomes aware of his
deceitfulness; that much will leave. Otherwise a great deal still
remains within him and that is what he is not aware of. What is
kapat bhaav (deceitful intent)? If the owner were aware of its

434

Aptavani-9

existence within, then he would have got rid of it a long time ago.
Therefore, beware, beware, beware!
If you listen to any talk about others, it ruins your mind.
What is more, when you hear talks about you from someone
else, it sounds sweet to you. Everyone has this disease however,
there are many who do not wish to know. If one day someone
comes to tell one, he will listen for a while. He likes it because
his wish is being fulfilled, is it not? He heard it from somewhere
and brought it here! Now the person who brings the news, does
not know the grave consequences of what he does. He is simply
absorbed in the pleasure of it. Sooner or later you will have to
understand all this, will you not? And what will the middle man
do? Sometimes he may give misinformation, what kind of effect
will this have on your mind? It will ruin your mind; conflicts will
arise creating rifts which continue to harm you. Rather than this,
what if one simply rejects this ‘system’ of eavesdropping?
Would it not be good to uproot it completely? What is wrong
in not having such a “business” - in not having that “item”
altogether?
A husband will ask, ‘what was my wife saying?’ and the
wife will ask, ‘what was my husband saying?’ Why on earth do
they want to know? It’s because they are both at fault, are they
not? Will they have the desire to know if they were faultless?
Why such spruha (inclination and interest) for this? This
is the greatest food for the worldly people. This is called
‘holiday’ (Dadashri’s term for languishing in meaningless and
harmful pleasures)! One must not have such a habit here—on
the path of liberation.
Questioner: But Dada, what should one do when he has
to be deceitful out of fear of someone?
Dadashri: You must not employ deceit out of fear. Why
should you fear anything? People who steal have to fear, why
should you? Who would experience fear, one who is guilty or

Aptavani-9

435

who is innocent? One feels fear because of guilt. Why not
become free of all guilt?
Questioner: All the puzzles will be solved if I can
resolutely adhere to the goal of liberation in which I have no
other desires and if I can clearly understand the obstructing
causes on the path of liberation, then all conflicts will vanish and
it becomes very easy.
Dadashri: Even the resolution of ‘I desire only liberation
and nothing else,’ is more than enough. If that becomes a reality,
then the task is accomplished, is it not? But people still have
expectations like, ‘It will be nice if so and so says nice things
about me’ whereas the real traveler on the path of liberation is
desirous of knowing only the truth, desirous for only moksha.
Such a one does not interfere in any matter whatsoever.
The belief of ‘I know’ is spiritual suicide
Questioner: Can one say that this attitude and belief of
‘I know, I understand’, is the greatest obstruction in the path of
moksha?
Dadashri: Yes, it is a very grave danger and it leads to
one’s spiritual suicide (aapghati kaaran).
Questioner: Please explain some more. If a person
becomes free of this belief, what kind of attribute will he have?
And what kind of attributes will one have when he is filled with
this grave mistake, and how can he maintain awareness against
such a mistake?
Dadashri: Small children have a healthy fear of adults. A
child experiences fear because of the heat of the intellect of the
adult. So what should the adult do? The adult should become
like a child; just like a child with a limited understanding. You
have to interact with children by becoming like a child. You have
to come down to the level of the child and then the child will
play with you. Even a year and half-old child will play with ‘us’,

436

Aptavani-9

as if we were of the same age. Should we not be able to see
some kind of result, at least? Think about this and one day you
will be able to understand. Once it comes into your understanding
then you will be able to find it. And one needs to have an
impartial approach - not take sides of Chandulal (the relative
self). This ability to see from the viewpoint of the child may be
difficult for you due to a deficiency of keen internal awareness
(jagruti), but it will come to you eventually.
All negative worldly interactions (vyavahar) occur because
of ‘this’ mistake. Interactions, which are labeled wrong or
inappropriate, are due to ‘this’ mistake. The main mistake is the
mistake of having the belief ‘I know’. This, ‘I know’ is a very
grave fundamental mistake. Consequently, all other mistakes
follow. All other mistakes arise from this main mistake.
Obstinacy (aadayee) persists due to this mistake only. Otherwise,
one would be simple and straight. It is easy to be simple and
accepting of Dada. Here, with Dada, you are in harmony. Does
that require any effort (purusharth) on your part? You need to
have the same kind of harmony with a person with whom you
do not get along. That is your purusharth.
The disease of ‘I know something’ exists within every
person. This Gnan increases along side this intoxication (keyf) of
‘I know’. The intoxication is the obstruction (antaray). If this
obstruction of this keyf is not there, then the Gnan would fit very
nicely and will grow very beautifully.
Questioner: That intoxication arises many times even
when we do not want it.
Dadashri: Yes that will happen; it will happen naturally.
Questioner: How can that intoxication come to an end?
Dadashri: You should not let it arise in the first place. It
will not stop once it starts; it will not go away. Therefore, you
must not let it arise.

Aptavani-9

437

Questioner: But Dadaji, we are talking about intoxication,
which is subtle (sookshma). It is not ordinarily visible.
Dadashri: Everything is subtle. The owner too is
unaware of it.
Questioner: So how is it possible to prevent it from
arising?
Dadashri: What do you do in order to prevent the
kashaya of anger, pride, deceit and greed from arising? You
have to keep awareness that prevents them from arising.
Questioner: How can I know that the intoxication (keyf)
has not arisen?
Dadashri: Your face will look attractive. Such a person
will look very attractive. Otherwise, everyone looks unattractive.
Alas, how is it possible not to know? Can you not tell whether
a bunch of spinach is fresh or two days old? It is the same in
this case. There is nothing subtle about this, is there? You can
tell right away by looking at it from the surface. Everyone has
the intoxication (keyf) of ‘I know,’ to a greater or a lesser
degree. Only few people become free from it; these people have
understood the facts. Beauty (laavanya) will not radiate in the
presence of intoxication. It is because of the unawareness
(ajagruti) that this intoxication takes place. It will not happen if
awareness is present. Wrong things arise out of unawareness
(ajagruti) but not so with awareness.
Questioner: Dada what kind of awareness should one
maintain when such a mistake (dosh) arises?
Dadashri: It will not arise in the presence of strong
awareness (jagruti). This is not awareness at all. If awareness
is present, the sapling of intoxication (keyf) of ‘I know’ will
never grow. This ‘plant’ of intoxication has sprouted after Gnan.
These very plants have grown after Gnan. All those old ‘plants’
were destroyed when ‘we’ gave you this Gnan, but this new

438

Aptavani-9

‘plant’ has sprouted since then. This would not occur in the
presence of awareness. Everything has occurred because of
unawareness (ajagruti). There are truckloads and truckloads of
unawareness and not just unawareness related to one or two
mistakes. Such intoxication will crop up where there is
tremendous ajagruti at a very gross and superficial level;
otherwise it would never arise, how can it?
Questioner: In this matter, what kind of things should we
be aware of?
Dadashri: About everything, you must make sure that
nothing sprouts.
Questioner: So what kinds of things are included in that?
Dadashri: Do you mean why does it arise in the first
place? The fact that it sprouts is unawareness (ajagruti) itself.
The awareness lacks by that much. Why should it arise? Why
does awareness arise when kashaya occur? Your awareness
surfaces even when the other person is doing kashaya. This
intoxication (keyf) of ‘I know’ is more treacherous than
kashaya. It is suicidal. It will destroy you. A person will say, ‘I
know, but am not able to do anything.’ Intoxication of having
knowledge?! In the ignorant ‘Gnan-less’ state, there is always
the intoxication of the ego of ‘I know’. But here if intoxication
arises after attaining the knowledge of the Self, then how wrong
an understanding is that? The intoxication of having Gnan?!
Questioner: Dadaji, kashaya occur because of
circumstances. When the kashaya arises, so does the awareness
against it. It is not something that remains constantly. Whereas
this intoxication of ‘I know’ - is it something that is constantly
there within?
Dadashri: It just keeps growing. You even keep watering
it; it is also being watered constantly. There is unawareness
(ajagruti) day and night. That is what I call suicidal! Knowing
(janyoo) is that when all kinds of intoxications leave.

Aptavani-9

439

Questioner: If I am talking about Dadaji’s Gnan with
someone, to begin with, in my mind there is the feeling of, ‘I
know’.
Dadashri: Yes, that verily is this disease.
Questioner: So how should I talk to people, Dadaji?
Dadashri: But those talks will not have any substance
and competence (barkat). They will not be fruitful. How will it
fit the other person? ‘I know’ is a grave disease!
That is why ‘we’ say, that in conversing with anyone, we
apply a counter-pulley to come down to the level of the
questioner. ‘We’ do not have the disease of ‘I know’, so it is
easily applied. ‘We’ do not have that disease at all. ‘We’ are
free from all such diseases. By sitting near ‘us’, all such diseases
in you will go away. Keep asking me things and get your work
done. It is not going to do you much good if you just sit here.
For that matter even this tube light just sits with me, does it not?
When a conflict occurs with someone, talking to him with
the intoxication of ‘I know’ in the mind makes a mess of
everything. You will not be able to maintain the right level! The
‘level’ will not come!
Questioner: Dadaji, the awareness should be such that
the moment a wrong thought arises, it would be caught
immediately; it would be caught the second it arises.
Dadashri: Yes, it is enough if it can be caught. It must be
caught the moment it sprouts. That is why ‘we’ tell you to
destroy it the moment it sprouts, the moment you see another
part growing, destroy it. But how can this be possible without
awareness (jagruti)? And tremendous awareness is needed.
How can one even have that much expectation? Therefore, you
cannot expect everything.
Therefore, tackle with a solution. If someone comes and
tells you ‘your knowledge is very deep and profound’, know

440

Aptavani-9

instantly that this is the place where the disease is going to grow.
That is the direct cause of the disease! Become very alert there!
Did you ever experience sweetness in this matter before?
The day the sweetness takes hold within, is the day this disease
will arise. Then if the sweetness is experienced again in it, it will
sprout long shoots, just like the shoots on the mango tree. It
reaches a certain height with two shoots, then with an additional
pair of shoots, it will grow taller; it will continue to grow in this
manner. If you drink the water of this sweetness, it will nurture
this plant. If the sweetness arises upon hearing someone say
‘Wow Chandulal! You have become a Gnani’, then the disease
has started to grow within.
Now if that happens, if the sweetness is experienced, you
should apply another solution. This solution is to erase it
immediately. We do have solutions for it. It is natural for that
disease to arise. The disease of the seed that has been sown in
the past life will manifest in this life but we do have solutions for
the diseases, here. This Vignan (science) we have is not without
solutions, is it?
Questioner: No. Here every sentence is capable of
getting rid of all diseases.
Dadashri: Yes, we do have the solutions. The root of this
disease lies in the sweetness that prevails when someone gives
you compliments, ‘what a great thing has happened.’ And there
is sweetness in this, is there not? It will make you forget
liberation.
Questioner: But it is dangerous, very dangerous as far as
liberation is concerned.
Dadashri: Yes, dangerous, it is killing of the self
(atmaghati)! If someone says that to you, you simply have to
reply, ‘my dear fellow, only I know my situation. How would
you know?’ If you say this, he will calm down. Do you want to
be a guru?

Aptavani-9

441

Questioner: Dada we need to become free from this.
Dadashri: It is a very dangerous trap! Yet when the
unfolding circumstances call for it, it is our duty to help people.
However, it must unfold as a circumstance (udaya). There is
nothing to gain from becoming a guru; it must come as result of
unfolding circumstances. The circumstances will unfold on their
own. It is a different matter if you are forced to sit on the seat
you do not want to. Therefore you should not have any
expectations for it.
Is anyone likely to fail, if he were to grade his own paper?
Questioner: No one will.
Dadashri: If a person examines his own paper, gives
himself a grade and fails himself, then I would consider his action
as a true judgment, but that does not happen, does it?
Questioner: And here one even struggles to appear
humble on the outside.
Dadashri: That is why I call it killing the Self atmaghat! It will lead to one’s suicide. All one has to ‘see’ is
whether people are attracted. Are they? No, they are not. Then
it means that a great amount of the disease of ‘I know’ exists
within. Attraction verily is purity! Attraction will occur as purity
begins.
Questioner: No, Dadaji, people do get attracted. They
get attracted for a little while, do they not?
Dadashri: No. Not at all! Not even a bit! No one will
stay. The bulb will blow out on the first day. People will manage
to overlook for a couple of days but not for long. This here is
a Gnani Purush and that is why you are able to know the faults
and mistakes (dosh) that lie within you. Otherwise, how can you
know of their existence? The ship will start sailing south! It
heads south because the compass is malfunctioning. That
compass will show south as being the north. Otherwise, the

442

Aptavani-9

compass always point towards the north; that is its nature. But
if the compass malfunctions, what can anyone do? Furthermore
one does not know how to look for the Northern Star.
Will you not have to know all these danger signals? Do
you think you can ignore them?
Questioner: No, they are all very dangerous.
Dadashri: It is called the suicidal element (aapghati
tattva).
Questioner: Besides, it does not even let us progress
further. It will not allow the Gnan to unfold.
Dadashri: It will not. It will destroy everything. It will
even bring down whatever is already in existence.
Questioner: The amazing thing is that the words that are
expressing from You, ‘touches’ that within exactly, they eradicate
the disease within, they change the vision and we can exactly
‘see’ it working from within. Everything appears to be very
scientific.
Dadashri: Only if the talk is completely scientific, will it
bring closure (nivedo) to people, otherwise it will not.
“Marag sachaa meel gayaa, chhoot gayaa sandeha”
“Having attained the right path, all doubts and suspicion
are gone”
Suspicion and doubts are gone; the true path has been
attained. You will have to walk back if you get lost. What else
will you have to do? Those who want moksha will find that path.
Simply ask Dada whether you are on the wrong path or the right
one? Ask just this much. Do not ask, ‘How is my Gnan?’ Just
ask, ‘Am I lost or am I on the right path?’ If Dada says, you
are on the right one, then go ahead.

* * * * *

Aptavani-9

443

[8]
Awareness (Jagruti) : The desire to be
worshipped
Do not rush to answer questions about Gnan
You will have to attain the understanding through ‘the
understanding (samjan) of the Gnani Purush’; “parallel to
parallel”. Otherwise, the ‘railway line’ will be lost. You do not
have to apply your own understanding. There is no understanding
whatsoever within, is there? Not even an iota of understanding
is within. You are not to apply your own understanding in all this
anyway. You do not have any understanding at all. You would
have become God if you had.
Questioner: If people ask questions and we give
answers and clarifications, what is wrong in doing that?
Dadashri: To give clarification to a question is a different
thing. The awareness (jagruti) has yet to come, then that
awareness has to take hold within, as an experience (parinaam).
After the awareness has taken hold, and you have gained the
experience, then a long time after that, the clarifications
(khulasa) you give will be helpful. Otherwise those clarifications
will become mis-clarifications, and your Gnan will go down. It
will become intellectual (buddhigamya) in nature.
Before you even attempt to answer any questions, all
forms of egoism within you must vanish. This means the
‘dramatic ego’, i.e. the residual ego, also known as the
discharge ego, must also be gone. The ego should not be
apparent to the world. At the moment, all the ‘functions’ are still
very weak (one has not become free from kashaya), they are

444

Aptavani-9

not strong enough. Until all those functions are completed (free
from kashaya), the speech will not be syadvaad. Syadvaad
speech is egoless speech; it does not hurt any living being.
Instead, it is better that you do not say anything. Otherwise you
will incur a liability (dosh). As all these facets go down, as the
intellect goes down, as the egoism starts to diminish, the speech
will become syadvaad. For the time being, do not get involved
with answering questions. Otherwise you will be serving
something that is ‘half cooked’. It will mislead you, your spiritual
progress will be hampered and it will be difficult to turn things
around once the damage is done.
Therefore, there must not be the ‘taste’ of sweetness in it
by the egoism and the intellect. In addition, in that process, there
should be repulsion (abhaav) towards any involvement of the
ego or the intellect. And this should become an established
internal study (abhyaas), only then is it useful and worthy! Until
then it is better to wait and be patient.
On the path of full enlightenment…
Do you ever talk and discuss things with people? Do not
get into any discussions anywhere, because people will listen but
what will become of you? People will listen with one ear and let
it out the other, but You too will become sucked into its false
sweetness. This happens because the egoism, the tendency for
the intellect and ego to take over, is still present, and they (anger,
pride, deceit and greed) are all just ready and hungry waiting
with anticipation, ‘when will I get something to eat...when will I
get something to eat?’ And so slowly they get the nourishment
they need.
Why do you go around discussing Gnan when the ego
and all the rest within have not yet diminished? No body benefits
even two cents worth and you keep blowing your horn
unnecessarily! Everyone will find the words very pleasing,
people will even say ‘I really like what you said’, but during that

Aptavani-9

445

time your ego will increase and those people will not gain any
benefit. It simply ‘smells’ good, that is all. It is like enjoying the
aroma of the jalebee (sweet delicacy), without getting a taste
of it.
If You want to keep your path to liberation weak, then
this other path, the traditional Kramic path, will be good for you.
You will even get to enjoy the sweetness along the way.
However, in this path of ours, with the slightest weakness, the
ego and everything else within are just waiting, ready to pounce
the moment they get something to eat. The ego within is
constantly looking for food and nourishment. This is the case for
everyone. Everyone has ego waiting within. When the ego takes
over it will not look for just some commission. At the moment,
it is simply looking for commission, but later on, it will take over
the entire wealth, including you. It is there, already present
within. You should always continue to be aware that the
presence of the ego is always there. And until then do not fall
prey to anything. Do not give the ego any opportunity or the
scope to become strong.
People will readily flock after you if you speak even a little
about our Gnan. People have never experienced peace such as
this before. They have never heard of anything like this before
so naturally they will jump at the opportunity. And the ego sitting
within you will be laughing, ‘Yes, great I get to eat!’ It has been
looking for this opportunity from the very beginning. Do You
want to attain the Absolute state or do You want to leave it
unfinished? If You want to attain the Absolute state, then You
cannot afford to be weak about anything. Even if someone asks
you a question, do not fall prey to this weakness.

Upsham - it is nothing but a smoldering fire
First You will understand the Gnan through the medium of
the intellect (buddhigamya) and that too it will come by listening
intently to the Gnani Purush for a long time. It will be of worth
only if you study it slowly and gradually.

446

Aptavani-9

‘We’ have to seriously caution the one whose awareness
(jagruti) increases significantly. He is safe if he abides by the
Agnas. But it is very difficult to have a safe side.
The fact that you can see your ego, it is very good
awareness (jagruti). Otherwise you will see everything but your
own ego. Everything else will be evident. That which is going to
aggressively overpower you, is the only one that will not be
evident.
The intellect (buddhi) must come to an end, then the ego
and then all the rest of the desires of the pudgal (the non-Self
complex). At the moment, these desires (ichchha) are not
evident within, but they are there for sure, latent and smoldering
(upsham) within. They are suppressed within and they must all
come to an end (kshay). At the moment one is not aware of all
these desires. As long as thoughts of sexuality (vishaya) arise,
it proves that desires of the pudgal (the non-Self complex) are
indeed present. As long as sexual thoughts arise within, it is
evident that the physical desires are real and until then the fire
within is smoldering and latent.
Therefore, be cautious. This is very dangerous, it will
topple you over and there is no telling where you will land. Not
only will the awareness (jagruti) go away but even this state of
samkit - the right vision that you have acquired - will go away
too. That ego and everything else within will then take control
over you. That is why the Lord called them “upsham goon” smoldering attributes (latent kashayas), which are likely to
reignite anytime and make you fall for sure.
Questioner: But since you have placed us on the twelfth
gunasthanak – the twelfth spiritual stage, we will not fall will
we?
Dadashri: No, You will not fall. Who is likely to fall? The
one who is in the worldly life will fall. The twelfth spiritual stage
is for the nischaya; the Self, and vyavahar is on the eleventh

Aptavani-9

447

stage. In the vyavahar (worldly life), one falls before reaching
the eleventh stage. All of a sudden one reaches the eleventh
stage and then falls again. Therefore, the eleventh gunthanu is
applicable to the worldly life and here there is upsham – the
inner kashayas are latent, like the smoldering coals.
So it will not work, until everything within is destroyed.
Nothing will work until all the vyavahar comes to an end. Hey!
One cannot even get past the ninth stage! As long as one
continues to have sensual thoughts, he will not be able to cross
the ninth. So if he ever tries to talk about Gnan, he will find
himself in a predicament. There is grave danger in it, grave
danger, because the diseases are still latent within; they have not
been destroyed. They will have to go. They will have to be
destroyed first. It is like a smoldering fire, there is no telling
when it will ignite again.
Partiality towards the self veils the reign of
the Self
One is still partial towards the relative self. There is
complete partiality towards the relative self. When you stop
being partial to the self, you can discover your mistakes. Do you
understand what is meant by partiality? The belief and the
awareness of ‘I am Chandulal’ is no longer in existent, it is gone,
but when karmas come into fruition, you become one with the
karma (udaya-swaroop). The moment you become udayaswaroop, the awareness (jagruti) is shrouded and hence you
cannot see the mistakes. This old tendency of becoming udayaswaroop becomes weak when you continue attending satsangs
and the awareness of the Self (upayog) becomes firm. Lack of
satsang leads to the shrouding of the awareness as the Self.
If a thief enters your home, you will be able to know right
away because of the presence of the Soul (the Self) within. But
why is it that you are not able to know? Because there is a
partiality and a belief within of ‘Nothing will happen to us’ and

448

Aptavani-9

so this leads to that aspect being veiled and shrouded and
therefore it does not let You ‘know’. Otherwise it is easy to
‘know’ and understand.
Upon hearing the question, ‘Whose ring is beautiful?’ one
will immediately raise his hand, because there is partiality of ‘my
ring is beautiful’ towards his ring.
Similarly one is partial to one’s self, and that partiality will
inevitably render one deluded (moorchhit). The delusion is such
that it will not allow him to know that there is partiality. ‘We’
have destroyed your belief of ‘I am Chandulal’, and the Self that
you have received remains as the Self too, but in the dizzy turn
of the udayakarma i.e. karma unfolding, you lose awareness of
‘what mistakes am I making and where do my mistakes lie?’
Everything is governed entirely by mistakes and because
of this, your realm and domain of the Self is veiled. ‘We’ have
given you the Self, but its realm, power and energy (satta) is
completely veiled. This is why the energy of speech (vachanbud)
and the energy of the mind (manobud) do not blossom.
Otherwise, how well the energy of speech blossoms! Even now
one is partial to sexuality (vishaya), deceit (kapat), and the ego
(ahamkar). Therefore maintain upayog; maintain jagruti - the
applied awareness as the Self - and keep the force of
attendance in satsang. Then your mistakes in your worldly
interactions (vyavahar) will become evident and the light of the
Self will travel far and wide. What happens if you do not attend
satsang? The upayog (application of awareness) will be halted.
Why is that? It is because of the partiality towards the relative
self! And you will not even know that this has taken place.
Awareness (jagruti) is not Gnan. Awareness is simply
awareness. Gnan is a different thing. Awareness means to
awaken from sleep (to be awakened from the ignorance of who
am I? It is to awaken to the knowledge of the Self). Now You
are awake. Now there is no longer ignorance of your real Self.
Gnan is a very great thing.

Aptavani-9

449

Everywhere else (in the Kramic path) Gnan manifests only
when all other smoldering fires (upsham kashayas) have been
put out i.e. when all the latent kashayas within have been
eradicated. Kshayo-psham – the state of partial purity - means
that the ego is still there, but it is not visible at the moment. There
is fire underneath but it is covered. Therefore, you cannot see it
from the surface. You think there are only ashes there, but you
will realize it when it ignites with the slightest of air.
That is when awareness leads to the
experience of Gnan
It will be beneficial if You keep increasing awareness
(jagruti). You will not bind karma when Your awareness
increases. There is no karma bondage with awareness (jagruti)
and so everything will become clear from within. In the
meantime the ego continues to melt away.
There is no deceit (kapat) in pride (maan); if there were,
then awareness (jagruti) would not arise. Kapat is the curtain;
it is a veil. A veil obscures whatever it covers; it renders one
blind.
Questioner: What is deceit (kapat)?
Dadashri: It is where one tries to hide the vastu – the
element - the Soul. All of this is nothing but deceit (kapat), is
it not? Is this kapat not responsible for doing everything wrong
within? It only happens when deceit (kapat) and ego get
together. Who takes you on the wrong path? It is anger-pridedeceit-greed. These four will take you on the wrong path when
they get together. The ego is the root cause. And what does one
have greed (lobh) for within? He enjoys tasting the sweetness
that lies within.
Before awareness (jagruti) can give result (parinaam) of
the experience of Gnan, not a single percent of deceit (kapat)
can remain within. There should not be any element of deceit

450

Aptavani-9

(kapat) of any kind. There should be no thoughts of sexuality
whatsoever.
So what all must leave? The ego must come to an end.
The intellect (buddhi) must come to an end; it will not do if it
is smoldering or appears to be dead. It has to die. When all the
karmas are destroyed (kshay), then anger-pride-deceit-greed
will also be destroyed. When all these attributes are annihilated,
then speech will become syadvaad; it will not hurt any living
being and it will be acceptable to all. Until then there is danger.
There is tremendous danger, extreme danger!
Starve the kashayas for three years
The energies of anger, pride, deceit and greed are sitting
within, waiting in anticipation of ‘when will he let go of Dada so
that we can grab him.’ They are always ready to entice you one
way or another and lead you away from the Self. As long as
they are present within, as long as there is evidence of their
existence within, they cannot be eliminated. There is no merit in
saying anything (speaking to others about this Gnan) unless they
are destroyed. Such speech will be blown away in the air
without any effect. Hence, it is not worth saying anything.
When the sweetness (meethash) is experienced within, it
is the same as the kashayas getting nourishment. The kashayas
of anger-pride-deceit-greed get nourishment and they use their
strength and energies in full force on the other side. They
become weak because they remain hungry from not getting any
food for a while. They will go away if you do not feed them,
if you were to starve them for three years. But people continue
to feed them a little at a time. People are compassionate aren’t
they? So they keep feeding the kashayas. However, if you
were to starve them completely, they would not remain past
three years. Once they leave, the entire kingdom comes into
your hands.
Are you aware that these kashayas are being fed? Are

Aptavani-9

451

you able to tell which one of them came and ate? The kashayas
come and eat in this manner. This is how they feed. If they are
fed just twice a month, they become as strong as they were
before.
The kashayas have never been fed in ‘our’ home, which
is why they all left. Once it has been decided, ‘I do not want to
feed them’, then they will not feed. Awareness (jagruti) is
needed.
The kashayas are still sitting there; they have not gone
away. But at the same time, ‘we’ have not killed them either.
‘We’ are not himsak - violent - and that is why they have not
gone away yet. ‘We’ do not have to starve them to death either.
They simply remain at bay because of the aura and the ‘heat’ of
the presence of the Gnani Purush, so what can ‘we’ do? We
should not deliberately invite them either. Do they ever come to
you to dine?
Questioner: Yes they do.
Dadashri: If you feed them raw food today, then
tomorrow they will dine on cooked food. Therefore, you must
never have a relationship or the interaction of feeding them.
Whereas people feed them all the time, they feed their anger;
they feed their pride etc.
Questioner: These kashayas eat everything so what
should I do?
Dadashri: They will come to eat. Nevertheless Dadaji
stands over you and through his blessings and grace (krupa) it
is possible to clean everything. If you move away from this
satsang on your own, then everything will immediately latch on
to you. You should never leave Dadaji’s support and protection.
These kashayas of anger-pride-deceit-greed are
suppressed within and given a chance; they can still flare up
suddenly. So, if you want to bring an end to them all, then the

452

Aptavani-9

only way is let them die. Understand these two words: upsham
- that which can re-ignite and kshayak - that which will not reignite.
Your work will be attained when the generation of these
kashayas becomes smaller. It is a very difficult task to reduce
their numbers. It is a baggage of countless past lives. All these
kashayas within have become calm for now but some of them
can still continue to sprout. Moreover, some of them may sprout
in the next life, but that is not a problem. Your next life is going
to be very systematic and orderly. It would create problems if
they were to express here in this life. They will not let you move
from here.
Certification for doing Satsang
Until you attain the state of purnahuti – a state free of
vishaya and kashaya and the complete experience of the Self
(anubhav) - do not even attempt to tackle this topic (of doing
satsang with people), because the kashaya, the faults (dosho)
lie dormant and hidden, how can you even speak? One is not
certified as yet. The current state of yours is free of worries and
you are progressing slowly on the path of liberation. You should
not say anything unless the Gnani Purush, who is certified, tells
you to do so. When He gives you the certificate to do so, then
you can proceed.
All the faults (the kashayas) are ready and waiting within,
otherwise ‘we’ would tell you on the first day, ‘Go ahead and
speak, do satsang and I will sit leisurely.’ ‘We’ are looking for
such help, but that state will arise automatically when all the
kashaya within you become annihilated. Until then you should
not be in a hurry to do so.
The sweetness of doer-ship (garvaras) makes
one fall
What is the definition of awareness (jagruti)? It is called

Aptavani-9

453

awareness when one is not asleep (spiritually). A robber
(kashaya) will not enter if You are aware.
Questioner: So we should be able to ‘see’ our own
faults, should we not?
Dadashri: Yes, they are visible.
Questioner: We should also be able to see the ego
(ahamkar), should we not?
Dadashri: That too is visible.
Questioner: So then what is the reason behind one
slipping?
Dadashri: It is the ego that takes away all the ‘food’. To
take garvaras is to taste the sweetness of doer-ship. It is verily
the ego (discharge ego that exists after Gnan) that makes you do
everything and makes you slip. It traps you in the taste of doership (garvaras), by telling you ‘This is very good, it is very
good; people like it.’
Questioner: If one tastes too much of the ego’s
garvaras, will he fall again?
Dadashri: Of course! It is all nothing but sweetness that
one experiences in doer-ship. When someone says, ‘I did all
this’ it produces garva of doer-ship. As long as a person makes
money, the sweetness of doer-ship (garvaras) will continue to
arise, but when he incurs a loss, what does he say? He will say,
‘It was God’s wish!’ Let go of this foolishness! You claim to be
the doer when you were making money and now you are
blaming God! When garvaras arises, there is sweetness in it.
Wherever you find ‘sweetness’, know that a beating and
suffering is around the corner.
When there is no difference between the bitter and the
sweet (insult and praise), then know that Gnan is present. The
one who does not differentiate the bitter and the sweet is, and
is not affected by either, is the one who has Gnan.

454

Aptavani-9

You should not say even a single word to explain or clarify
any questions (about Gnan). Let there be casual conversations.
Do not think that there is a difference between you and the other
person. He talks because ‘he’ wants to show his superiority and
importance (visheshata). And ‘he’ (the discharge ego) is verily
the one who instigates and stirs up all those kashayas. Not a
single sentence of ‘ours’ is uttered with the intent of selfimportance (vishesh bhaav); the words just flow naturally. This
is because the speech is a ‘record.’ (The Gnani has no
ownership of the speech that comes out from him). There is no
problem once even your speech becomes a ‘record’ (when you
do not have ownership of your speech). There is no problem
after your speech becomes a record (when truly all ownership
of speech is gone), but as yet it does not come forth as a
‘record’, does it?
Generally, when two people are talking, you feel like
putting your ‘two cents’ worth. That is not called Gnan. Gnan
is not something to be used as a weapon to compete and
argue. There should not be any competition. Competitiveness
(spardha) is a worldly thing and it will keep you entrenched in
it.
Grace and awareness are different
The kashayas that lie smoldering within will be destroyed
as awareness (jagruti) increases. You have to take advantage
of this awareness. These external karmas (which present through
an external nimit and ignite the kashaya) lie smoldering within
but they die through samayik (focused application of the light of
the Self during introspective meditation) of events of kashayas
that have occurred. However, nothing is guaranteed until one
becomes ‘tested’- devoid of any reaction to any future situation
which would otherwise give rise to kashaya. Such ‘test
examinations’ in life are necessary.
Jagruti is that which ‘sees this, that and everything.’ That

Aptavani-9

455

is jagruti. This ‘Dada’ remains in your memory all day long.
This awareness of ‘I am Shuddhatma’ is there because of
‘Dada’. It is called the fruit of his grace (krupa-phala),
whereas, jagruti is a different thing altogether.
There is no need to rush in this. This Gnan that you have
attained is so rare, that one cannot attain it even in a hundred
thousand life times. Having attained it with such ease and in a
short while, one becomes embroiled in a rush and frenzy
(raghavaat). This is not a line of shortcuts or impatience. This
is the line of harmony, patience and stillness.
The Lord considers the establishment of the awareness
(laksha) of ‘I am Shuddhatma’ a greatest thing. In the Kramic
path, there is conviction (pratiti) of only ‘words’ that describe
the attributes of the Self. One attains the conviction of the
words, which describe the attributes of the Shuddhatma as ‘I am
this’ and they place a great value on this conviction of words;
they call this state samkit. However this conviction is only of
words, whereas you have attained the conviction of the vastu –
the actual Soul; the Self. It is a conviction that is natural to the
Self (swabhavik pratiti). That is why this conviction (pratiti) is
called kshayak (eternal). This Gnan can do a great deal of
work; it is a tremendous wonder.
Subtle change of ownership when talking to
others about Dada
So if you want to achieve the absolute state of
enlightenment (The Self) then maintain a very careful vigil; be
very alert. As far as possible, do not say anything in any place
whatsoever. Do not try to explain this Gnan to anyone.
Otherwise there will be contrary result. To speak even a word
of the speech of the Vitarag is a biggest spiritual liability.
What do people care, they will stick around you. All they
care about is that they will get something. Do they not stick

456

Aptavani-9

around you if they think they are going to get something from
you? You simply have to tell them, ‘This is not a task for me.’
You cannot utter even a word; otherwise it will ruin everything
within you.
Questioner: But can we not at least talk about our own
experiences?
Dadashri: There is no experience. The talk that comes
out is really the words that ‘we’ have spoken. Those words are
now sprouting forth. The experience however, comes very
slowly.
So the entire Vignan of the vitarag should be present. No
one knows even a fraction of this Vignan. It is ‘our’ speech that
had entered within, is what is coming forth. And if some strongheaded intellectual were to come along, he will destroy
everything with just a few words. Knowledge that is based on
the intellect (buddhigamya) will not work, will it? The world
already has intellectual knowledge, does it not? Arey! People
have memorized volumes and volumes of scriptures. You will
become confused if they utter just one word.
It is ‘our’ Gnan that has been given to you as a seed that
has grown and has produced the resulting (parinaam) experience.
What ‘we’ have given you remains in the form of a seed within
and it will grow again to give results. At the most you may talk
about the Gnan by saying, ‘Dadaji used to say…’ But when
speech comes forth in this manner, for a few days the listener
may feel ‘this man speaks exactly like Dadaji’ but where will
that take you? After a few days, it will make you fall hard; it will
not let you go.
Become a child of The Gnani
When someone gives you a compliment by saying, ‘You
spoke very well,’ tell him, ‘I am simply a child of Dada.’ Just

Aptavani-9

457

maintain this much awareness and alertness and do not get
involved in any other discussions.
When you digest my words, they will grow and come out
in speech. That is a different thing. However the words must be
as they are, without any change in tone, intent and meaning for
the listener. The speech must not be made up or fabricated
through imagination and intellect. What is the big hurry for you
anyway, at this time? Do you want to remain as a child of Dada
or do you want to become big and famous?
Questioner: I want to remain as a child of Dada.
Dadashri: That is it. There is fun in remaining as a child.
That way there is a safe side and no danger for you. ‘Dada’ has
to carry you. And if someone says, ‘I have grown up,’ then ‘we’
tell him, ‘yes, then go out and play on your own.’ ‘We’ try to
make him understand, ‘do not become ‘big’ and take off on
your own.’ but if he insists that he wants to, then ‘we’ let him
go. ‘Go ahead! You will come back when you get hurt and learn
your lesson.’ Our Gnan is such that it will not refrain from
teaching you a lesson.
‘You’ simply have to tell your relative-self, ‘Chandulal,
‘we’ know what you are like. So do not trap ‘us’.’ ‘You’ should
talk to him this way. Tell him, “We’ are with you when you
become learned and proficient in this matter, but if you trap ‘us’
in trouble, then you will be sorry!’
This is how everyone has grown up, have they not? A
child will learn to climb and if he falls, he will get up again and
so on. First, he learns to push the walker around for support and
then he learns to walk on his own. So this is the way to learn.
Is this not the only way?
So if you want to complete the work (of your own
salvation), then remember only one thing; if someone asks you
anything, just tell them, ‘I don’t know anything, please go to
Dadaji.’

458

Aptavani-9

Hold the silence to attain the ultimate state
of liberation
Do not get involved in discussion (conduct satsang) with
people until you have attained your goal of absolute liberation
(purnahuti). It is not something worth getting into. Yes, you may
say this much to people, ‘Go there, over there, the satsang is
very good, this is how you may attain it, etc.’ You may say this
much, but do not preach anything. This is not something you can
preach (updesh) to others. This is Akram Vignan; the science of
a short-cut and step-free path to Self-realization.
For those who have attained Dada’s Gnan, what they
speak comes out is solely on the basis of Dada’s Gnan and
hearing such a speech, the world will surrender everything to
him. What happens when people surrender in this way? He will
be left trapped and hanging. All those kashayas of subtle pride,
greed, self-validation, ego, and deception that have been laying
dormant (upsham) within, will ignite. These words have
tremendous appeal and attraction. This Gnan is very attractive.
Therefore, remain silent. If you want to get complete benefit
(liberation) then remain silent. If you want to open up a ‘shop’,
then you are free to talk. But such a shop will hardly have any
customers, and it will not last. It is because this is a ‘given Gnan
- you have been given this knowledge,’ and so it will not be long
before it vanishes. Such a shop runs for a while in the Kramic
- traditional path of liberation. It lasts for two or five or even ten
life times but then, that too vanishes. Opening a shop is
tantamount to selling off your siddhi – stock of spiritual energy
attained so far. That which has been attained is being abused
and sold off.
Goshada was a disciple of Lord Mahavir. He was a very
special disciple of the Lord. However, towards the end he
became an adversary of the Lord. He had spent a lot of time
with the Lord. As time went by he began to feel that he
understood all the Gnan. He left the Lord, went off on his own

Aptavani-9

459

and started proclaiming, ‘I am the tirthankara, he (meaning Lord
Mahavir) is not a tirthankara.’ At other times he used to say, ‘he
is a tirthankara, and so am I’. What can become of a person
once this disease sets in?
Now when one does not behave even in the direct
presence of Lord Mahavir, how likely is he to behave before
‘us’ and not go astray? What happens to people if they break
before they have a chance of becoming strong? And that
incident with Goshada took place in the fourth era whereas this
is the fifth era, a destructive time cycle as compared to the fourth
era; it will ruin countless lives to come.
People have taken just this kind of beatings from time
immemorial. They have had this very same beating over and
over again. The slightest taste of the inner pleasure sends the
‘monkey ego’ scrambling way up to the top.
The intense greed and craving to be
worshipped
Do you ever have an intense craving (kaamna) to be
praised or worshipped (poojavu)? Let me know if you do, I
will help you suppress it. That desire will stop if ‘we’ cut it off
at its roots. That kaamna is very dangerous. Such kaamna
does not arise in you, does it? It will arise some day for sure!
So consider it a danger and proceed with great caution. When
people praise you and welcome you, you will develop a habit
for it; it will take hold of you from within, just like the habit of
drinking tea. Then when you don’t get it, you become perplexed
and suffer. You will resort to deception (kapat) in order to get
respect and praise from others. There is great danger in this, so
beware.
But what are people hungry for? What is their bheekh beggary for? It is a beggary; the need to be worshipped. And
when someone even does ‘this’, give them respect by placing
their palms together and bowing their head to him, he becomes

460

Aptavani-9

elated. The fool! These are all signs of going to hell. There is
grave danger in this. Such habits, that have taken hold, will not
leave.
Questioner: How can one tell whether he has an intense
craving to be worshipped (poojavani kaamna)?
Dadashri: He can know everything; he knows what he
likes. Does he not know that he likes ice cream? The
‘thermometer’ (gauge) within, The Self, is there, hence he
knows everything.
The human beings of the current era are very lalachu insatiably greedy. They create their own world of self-importance;
they create situations where they get praise wherever they go.
And those who covet praise and recognition will not be able to
attain the truth. Everywhere you look, people have started their
own shops of worship. They have an intense inner craving to be
worshipped and praised. The moment someone folds his hands
and bows his head to him in a praiseful manner, the internal
sweet tingling rises in a crescendo. He wallows with indulgence
in such temporary pleasures.
That is a completely wrong path. There is no graver
disease than this intense craving to be worshipped. Who is to be
worshipped? The Self is indeed the One to be worshipped. So
where is the need to worship the body? But there is tremendous
greed and craving for wanting to be worshipped. What are you
going to gain from the worship of the body that is inevitably
going to be burnt in the funeral pyre? But alas! That lalacha
kashaya - the kashaya of insatiable greed is such that he seeks
to be worshipped. So these are all intense cravings (lalasa) of
wanting to be recognized and worshipped. Otherwise, liberation
is not difficult to attain. These tendencies (daanat) that exist
within are difficult and problematic.
It is very dangerous if such cravings arise. Have you ever
had such a craving or desire? Do you ever feel ‘tickled’ inside,

Aptavani-9

461

even a little? That is why ‘we’ caution everyone. People will fall
if ‘we’ do not warn you of this danger. If one were to fall having
arrived at such a high and worthy place, he will become useless
and get hurt very badly. He will not get hurt so bad if he falls
from a lower height but he will get hurt very badly if he has
attained a very high level. So remain wherever you are and do
not fall (regress) from there.
Do not bring your own words into this. Take the words
that I speak here and use them as they are. Do not even build
a new ‘station’. Or have you already built one? You have not
dug holes for the foundation have you? You have not built
anything have you? Should there not be a warning sign in place?
Or else where will you end up? This path is very different and
you will encounter so many enticing places and situations along
the way. You have never encountered such enticing situations
before. Even highly evolved spiritual beings have fallen victim to
this, so what hope is there for you? So follow this path of ‘Dada
Bhagwan’ properly. It is ‘a clear and a first-class road!’ There
is no risk or anything on it.
Danger zones in the path of moksha
Leave and forsake anything that interferes in the path of
liberation and proceed forward. That is considered, as following
the goal. You must make sure that you must not lose sight of
your own goal (dhyeya) of moksha no matter how difficult the
circumstance you encounter.
Some days, does everything work out according to your
goal? Nothing goes off track? So it has all become natural
(sahaj), has it not?
Questioner: I have to keep turning the ‘handle’ within.
Dadashri: Do you have to keep turning it? But do they
- the kashayas of greed, pride, anger and deceit, listen to you?
Right away?

462

Aptavani-9

Questioner: Yes, right away.
Dadashri: Right away? It takes no time? That is good.
The hallmark of internal separation and liberation is the extent to
which ‘they’ listen to You. The more they pay attention to Your
instructions and listen to You, the greater the freedom. You are
separate from them by that much. The Self - the absolute Soul
cannot be bribed. It cannot be tempted by any bribes. When the
self takes bribes and succumbs to such intense greed (lalacha),
the kashayas will stop listening to You – the enlightened Self. If
the self if being deceitful in corruption, then it will stop listening
to You - the Self who has the goal of moving ahead on the path
of liberation. Once one tastes the fruits of intense greed
(lalacha) and the bribes, those inner enemies (kashaya) will not
listen to him.
Such worldly interaction (vyavahar) will indeed drag one
only in the contrary direction, will it not? Such has been the
vyavahar for infinite lives, and this has been the path, has it not?
So now even when it goes towards the other side (the worldly
side), you have to steer it towards your own goal. An ox will
automatically walk on the old path it is used to, will it not? Now
You need to follow the path according to Your goal and not the
other way, the old path that you were used to. You have to say,
‘Not this way, walk on this one.’
So the inner enemies—anger, pride, deceit and greed, will
listen if you do not take the bribe. But once you take a bribe,
the suffering from all aspects will follow. Hence, you must never
deviate or step off from the decided goal – your dhyeya.
Questioner: What is that bribe like?
Dadashri: One will go and taste it. And in doing so if he
finds sweetness in it, he will sit and linger there. Having tasted
it once, he will return for a bottle or two of the same!
All this is deceptive tendency (kapat daanat). One wants
to follow the path of moksha but also has a deceptive intent;

Aptavani-9

463

how can the two co-exist? He should have a pure and clear
inner intent (daanat) without an iota of deception to taste any
promise or lure of pleasure. The problem is the old habit of
delving into and tasting the pleasures of the mind and body. In
doing so one tends to linger there enjoying the temporary
pleasures therein (masti).
Questioner: Is the pleasure seeking behavior (masti)
that of the prakruti (the non-Self complex of thoughts, speech
and body)?
Dadashri: Then who else’s? That is the habit he (the
relative-self) has developed, has he not? So You (the enlightened
Self) need to tell the non-Self, ‘no, I need to go this way, I don’t
want any masti (transient pleasure), I wish to proceed on my
path and attain my goal.’ These mastis of the prakruti will lead
you in a web of entrapment.
That which breaks Your goal is your enemy. How can
You afford to have your goal destroyed? Otherwise, such
behavior of indulgence is analogous to entertaining sexual
thoughts and ideas (abrahmacharya) while wanting to remain
on the path of celibacy (brahmacharya). Pleasure will arise
within thoughts, but what can you do? Is it not a grave fault?
Then naturally, your goal is bound to become infested with the
‘disease’! Putrefaction will start to invade, will it not?
Here, you have to make the mind so tenacious and firm
that whatever happens in this life, even if this body were to
leave, in this very life the ‘work’ needs to be finished and
accomplished. Such an unflinching and unwavering decision has
to be made. The work will then definitely be accomplished by
itself. You have to make this firm, for Yourself. There must not
be any sloppiness on Your part. Thereafter, whatever happens
is correct. Thereafter you must not worry if some things do not
work out. Everything will come along.
What is the extent of your authority (adhikaar) in this? It

464

Aptavani-9

is your bhaav - the deep inner intent - of ‘I would like to
accomplish this much.’ The nischaya - the determining energy
of the Self; you must use this authority of yours. And secondly,
be careful that you do not allow any external disease of ‘Let me
give satsang of Akram Vignan to a few people’. Care must be
exercised in this regard otherwise new diseases will creep in and
feed the inner enemies of pride, and lead you astray. It will pull
you away on to the wrong path. What becomes of the one who
goes astray? There will be no one to save him and bring him
back to the main path. Therefore, if You desire liberation do not
indulge in ‘talking about this’. If anyone asks you anything, just
say, ‘I do not know.’
‘We’ are pointing out all the danger zones and pitfalls on
the path of liberation. Things will go wrong if ‘we’ do not point
them out. All these mahatmas listening here have come here
with tremendous merit karma and hence this speech and this
topic has expressed in such exact details. Otherwise how is one
to know? And why would ‘we’ enter into such depths? This
matter has come forth in the course of our discussion. Otherwise
who had knowledge that such things do indeed go on?
To move on inconspicuously
Alochana—to recall and confess wrongdoing - begins
from the moment you tell ‘us’ what and how it has happened.
Whatever has happened is immaterial. It is always forgiven. But
the moment you tell ‘us’ exactly as it happened, that is the
beginning of alochana. That means you have turned around
from that path. Then ‘we’ clean it all. This path is filled with
pitfalls, so be careful. There is extreme danger in it. Do not
discuss a word with anyone. And if you want to, come and tell
me, I will then tell you, ‘Now you may speak.’ Otherwise, there
is grave danger in saying even a word.
The world’s salvation will occur, whenever the time
comes. When nature makes you ready as the nimit (instrument)

Aptavani-9

465

- of salvation, then proceed. You should not try to become
ready on your own. This is not something one can get ready for.
If you try to sell the siddhis - spiritual energy - what will the
world not give you? But in the process you will lose your wealth
of the human form. Not only will you lose it, but you will
become eligible to go to hell!
Ours is the path to moksha where one has to go very
silently and secretly.
Subservience to the Gnani Purush
Do not let go of this satsang no matter what others tell
you. You will receive the Lord’s grace - krupa - when you
come here, and everything will fall into place. It will not take
long at all. Problems and difficulties are inevitable on the way,
which is why we say, ‘In the face of all kinds of obstacles on
the path to moksha, I am the one with infinite energy.’ At the
same time the non-Self complex, as an opponent with its infinite
energy is there too, which prevents Your moksha.
That is why the Lord has said, ‘Proceed with subservience
(aadhinta) to the Gnani Purush; follow his instructions. Even if
he says something that does not quite sit with you or sounds
crazy, follow his instructions all the way. This is because He is
vitarag. If you cannot understand through your intellect, then just
make the decision that since you have understood and accepted
nine of the Gnani’s ten equations, it is immaterial if you do not
understand the tenth one. Do not find Him at fault. Just accept
the fact that it is your own mistake that you do not understand
Him. Why is it that you cannot understand His one point when
you can understand the rest? So do not find Him at fault here.
He has destroyed all His mistakes. The intellect is bound to
show you fault even in the Gnani Purush.
We can make do if it were a question of death of just one
lifetime, but when you do viradhana - irreverence and negative
talk about the Gnani Purush - you will incur deaths of a hundred

466

Aptavani-9

thousand lifetimes. Whose viradhana are you doing? Of a
vitarag?! You may curse this ‘Ambalal Muljibhai’ a hundred
times over. Go ahead and do so if you don’t agree with him! But
generally people make this grave error without even understanding
anything. That is why ‘we’ had to keep this Gnan a secret, and
had continued to keep it a secret for many years.
I have said that I am taking you to a very high place. If
you fall from there, you will not find even a fragment of your
bones. So either do not come up with me or if you want to
come with me, then tread very gently. Moksha is simple and
straightforward; this Vignan is such that it guarantees final
liberation in one more lifetime. But do not come up with me if
you want to misbehave. I have already told everyone this. This
road goes up very high and there will not be a bone left to be
found if you fall from there. All the same, some who have come
up with me, often worry and tell me, ‘He is likely to instigate
again; he will do this’. However, I have built such a protection
for him that he will not fall. Just as the authorities have installed
guard barriers, I too have a protection barrier. I have not
allowed anyone to fall yet.
Behold the compassion of the Gnani
The Gnani Purush will show you whatever ‘disease’ there
may be within. He will not show you any other faults (dosh).
This is because He wants to cure you of the disease. Do doctors
cure a patient’s disease or increase it? Besides, are ‘we’ saying
all this for our own goal or benefit? ‘We’ are saying all this
especially for you and that too with vitaragata - absolute and
complete detachment. The disease will not be eradicated
without stern words. What removes this disease? Vitaragata and
stern words! The sternness in those words is such that it will
break every joint in your body. And at the same time those
words are filled with complete vitaragata.
This ‘Dada’ sits leisurely as he continues to cleanse

Aptavani-9

467

everyone and sort everyone out. Still how can I do this for
everyone? I would lose my mind. Don’t you think I have a lot
to contend with from morning till night? How many ‘files’ must
come to ‘us’ in a day? Some even tell me, ‘My husband did this
to me.’ Do ‘we’ have to teach even that?
Questioner: There is not a single case, which has not
come before you Dada. All kinds of cases have come before
You.
Dadashri: What else can we do then? In fact ‘We’ had
said ‘no’ to a couple of people but a voice from within said,
‘Which ‘hospital’ will this poor man go to? If You send him
away from here, there is no ‘hospital’ out there suitable for him.’
So then, I started dealing with such problems again. But, the
mind found it bothersome. It would often prompt ‘us’ to push
it away. Again from within that voice would say, ‘Where will this
poor man go? What other ‘hospital’ will he go to? However
crazy he may be, even if he does not know how to speak, or
has no manners or any redeeming qualities, no matter what he
is like, let him be!’
Questioner: The part that says, ‘it will be good if he goes
away’, what part is that? And which part says, ‘Where will that
poor man go?’
Dadashri: The part, ‘Where will he go?’ is that of the
Lord within, the Parmatma. That One is saying, ‘No matter
how crazy he is or how disrespectfully he speaks to ‘us’, where
will he go?’ That is the Supreme Soul speaking within! No other
‘hospital’ will shelter such a man. As it is, they do not even take
care of those who are good. And even if they were to keep such
people, they do not have any medicine to treat them with. All
they have is some poultice of crushed powder, which will not
work here. For this, you need a special ‘glue’ that will stick the
moment it is applied.
Otherwise, who will stick his hand in this stinking mud?

468

Aptavani-9

But even if just one human being is helped, he can then help so
many others. And when ‘we’ scold anyone, it is with the
intention to liberate. Otherwise, who would scold in this way?
Who would ruin the mind? This scolding is for the salvation
(kalyan) of that person. A father scolds his son to exercise his
fatherhood. More than the welfare of the son, he has the intense
beggary to be the father. If a husband is scolding his wife, he
does it for his beggary of maintaining his superiority as a
husband (husband-hood; dhanipanu). But when the Gnani
Purush scolds, He does it for the salvation of that person.
The whole world is roasting like potatoes in the fire.
People of this country as well as in foreign countries; everyone
is roasting in the worldly fire. When I told someone that people
are roasting like sweet potatoes, he told me, ‘Dada, not only are
they roasting but they are now on fire! Whatever moisture there
was in the potatoes has gone and now they are on fire!’ Such
is the current predicament of everyone in the world. What must
be the goal of ‘our’ satsang? It is to bring salvation for the world
– jagat kalyan. This bhavna does not go to waste.
What ‘We’ are saying is destroy all miseries. ‘We’ cannot
bear to see these miseries and suffering. Still ‘we’ do not
become emotional about it. At the same time ‘we’ remain that
much vitarag too. Despite this, ‘we’ cannot bear to see people
suffering. This is because ‘we’ know ‘our’ limits of tolerance
(sahanshakti). ‘We’ know from ‘our’ own experiences and
how ‘we’ dealt with pain and suffering, so ‘we’ know what
these people are going through. That verily is the expression of
‘our’ compassion (karunyata).

* * * * *

Aptavani-9

469

[9]
I-ness (potapanu) : Supreme Soul (Parmatma)
Oneness with the entire universe
Here there is oneness (abheda bhaav). You and I are all
one. I do not feel separate from any of you. And even with the
fifty thousand people here, there is no sense of separation
(judai) with anyone of them. Neither is there any separation
with the rest of the world. You are the one who has separation.
So to begin with, I remain one (abheda) with all these fifty
thousand mahatmas here, and secondarily I remain one with the
whole world. I do not have any separation (judai) with anyone
anywhere. Therefore, this is the primary oneness (abhedta) and
the other is the secondary oneness. I do not want anything else.
I do not have any buddhi (intellect) and that is why I feel
oneness with everyone. I feel like everything is mine. Separation
occurs in the presence of the intellect, so how can there be any
separation when there is no intellect? Intellect creates separation
(bheda); it shows ‘this is mine and that is yours’ and that is
separation. How can this division of ‘yours’ and ‘mine’ exist when
there is no intellect? This divisive intellect (bheda buddhi) that has
arisen is the one that shows, ‘I am separate from this person’.
Questioner: The moment one becomes separate (alag),
he feels the separation (judai), does he not?
Dadashri: And with that separation (alagata), one has
gone in the wrong direction. I do not have any separation with
you, but you have separation from me.
Questioner: Do many people not say ‘we are all one’?

470

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: One says that but the sense of separation
(judai) remains. Until ‘that’ – the absolute state - is attained, the
separation will remain. One may say, ‘we are all one’ but as long
as the precise ‘fitting’ does not occur, he will continue to feel the
separation. That is why I do not feel the separation from anyone
in this world. I consider not only those who have come here, as
mine but everyone else as mine too. They are all mine and I am
theirs.
The experience of the Self increases as the duration and
intensity of oneness prevails. Yes, the belief of separation is
verily the reason for the dissipation of the energy of the Self. All
these problems exist because of the belief of separation. Do you
have any judai - sense of separation - with anyone?
Questioner: I want to remove this sense of separation,
Dada.
Dadashri: What are you saying? There is no other way
but to be rid of the separation. You will have to become abheda
(one who has no separation with any one), will you not?
Potapanu, (‘I-ness’); the last remnant of ‘I am this body’ will
have to leave. Once this potapanu leaves, the separation
(judai) will go. Now, as long as there is intellect, this ‘I-ness’
(potapanu) will not go away, will it? And as long as there is
intellect, does it not create the separation (bheda)? Once
potapanu leaves, one becomes abheda - the One without
separation.
I-ness (potapanu)
Look, let me tell you as it is; once and for all. A great
deal of time, life after life, has passed in this way, for ‘us’. That
is why I am showing you an easy way. I had to look for the
path on my own, but I am showing you the path that I have
traversed. I am giving you the key to unlock all the obstacles
along the way.
This ‘Ambalal Muljibhai Patel’, has let go of his ‘I-ness’

Aptavani-9

471

and surrendered everything only to the Lord. The Lord now
takes care of everything for A. M. Patel, and He (the Lord)
does take care of everything, does He not? The ‘I-ness’ that
was there before, left with the departure of the ego. Otherwise,
the ego is not such that it will leave.
The separation exists only as long as there is the presence
of ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) and until then the Lord stays away. The
Lord is with you as soon as you let go of the ‘I-ness’. Why
don’t you let it go? It is so easy! If you let go of the ‘I-ness’,
then God Himself will take care of everything for you. You will
not have to do anything if you let go of the ‘I-ness’.
Who do you know as ‘Dada Bhagwan’ in this? The one
you see sitting in front of you is a ‘public trust’ called A. M.
Patel. And people take him to satsang wherever they can,
whenever the circumstance arises because there is no sense of
‘I-ness’ within ‘us’.
What has Shrimad Rajchandra said about a Gnani
Purush? The Gnani Purush is the One who does not have even
the slightest inclination (spruha). He has no beggary of any kind.
He has no beggary for giving updesh (spiritual discourse); He
has no beggary for disciples. He has no beggary to change
anyone for the better. He has no garva or garavata – no doership or wallowing in worldly pleasures; no ‘I-ness’ (potapanu).
All the above are inherent in ‘I-ness’.
In this world there is not a single man that does not have
a sense of ‘I-ness’. It is a different matter when we talk about
the universe; there we have the tirthankaras. But as far as this
world is concerned, there is no one without ‘I-ness’. Only those
who have fallen short of attaining the tirthankara lineage are free
of ‘I-ness’ in this world.
The Gnani does not have ‘I-ness’
What are the attributes and qualities of the one without ‘I-

472

Aptavani-9

ness’? What does it mean to have no ‘I-ness’ (potapanu)? If
you were to tell a Gnani Purush, ‘Let us go to Mumbai today,’
he will not say, ‘No’. If people take him to Mumbai, he will go
like a ‘piece of baggage’ and he will return to Ahmedabad like
a piece of baggage. So he does not have ‘I-ness’. If people ask
‘us’ ‘Dadaji when shall we go?’ ‘We’ tell them, ‘Whenever it
suits you.’ ‘We’ do not say anything more. So when they take
this piece of baggage, there is nothing wrong in it. ‘We’ tell
them, ‘Son, take ‘us’ when it suits you’, because ‘we’ do not
have any ‘I-ness’.’ Do you think anyone who has ‘I-ness’ will
go anywhere like a piece of luggage? He will say, ‘I am not
coming today.’ Would anyone be ready to become a piece of
luggage? Would anyone say such a thing?
Many people in Mumbai and Vadodara tell ‘us’, ‘Dada,
it would have been nice if you had come early.’ They say such
things, so ‘we’ tell them, ‘They bring me like a baggage and take
me away like a baggage.’ Then they understand, but they ask
me, ‘Why do you say ‘like a baggage’?’ Alas! If this is not like
a baggage then what is it? The Lord is within for sure, but on
the outside if this is not a baggage, then what is it? Hence, there
is no ‘I-ness’.
I will go wherever they carry ‘us’. Often there are many
things ‘we’ do not want to eat and yet we do, there are times
‘we’ do not want to drink and yet ‘we’ do. ‘We’ even do other
things that ‘we’ do not want to. ‘We’ do not have a say in these
matters. It is all mandatory (farajiyat). ‘We’ will drink your tea
to give you encouragement. Even if the tea is too strong and it
does not suit the prakruti, ‘we’ will still drink it because it will
make you happy that ‘Dada drank my tea’. That is why ‘we’
will drink it.
During this journey that ‘we’ just made, ‘we’ did what
others asked ‘us’ to. If they say, ‘You have to stay here’, ‘we’
will stay there. If they say, ‘Now let us go from here,’ then ‘we’
will do that.’ ‘We’ do not have any amaarapanu - ‘we-ness’.

Aptavani-9

473

The ‘we-ness’ is gone completely. For too long ‘we’ have lived
with this ‘we-ness’. ‘We’ did not have any ‘my-ness’ –
mamata from the beginning and therefore there was no
problem.
It is like this, I am subservient (aadhin) to everyone.
What is the reason behind this? It is because there is no ‘I-ness’
(potapanu). Therefore, I am absolutely subservient to the
circumstances. I am also subservient to all of you. Subservient
means a completely egoless state! To be subservient (aadhinta)
is a very good thing. ‘We’ do whatever the person who is with
‘us’ tells ‘us’ to do. ‘We’ do not have any opinions. If ‘we’ feel
that there is weakness in what he is saying, ‘we’ will tell him,
‘brother, do it this way.’ After that, ‘we’ remain subservient.
Naturalness is attained synchronously as the
last remnant of the ego leaves
This is ‘our’ naturalness (sahajikata). There is never any
problem in the state of naturalness. There is never any
interference, of any kind at all. If you say it is this way, then so
be it and if you say it is that way, then so be it. There is no
remnant of potapanu (last traces of discharge ego). And you on
the other hand are not the kind to let go of this ‘potapanu’, are
you? To me if someone says, ‘we are going by car’ then it is fine
and again tomorrow if he says, ‘we will have to go by train,’
then that is fine too. There is never a ‘no’. ‘We’ (referring to the
Gnani Purush and the fully enlightened Lord within) have no
objection at all. ‘We’ have no opinion. This is naturalness.
Naturalness is to follow the lead of the opinion of others; it is to
do according to the wishes of others.
‘We’ are always in the state of naturalness. This
naturalness is continuous. There is not a single moment out of
naturalness. ‘We’ remain as nature keeps ‘us’, because the egoless state has been attained. How can you become spontaneous
(sahaj) with even the slightest existence of ‘I-ness’? When one

474

Aptavani-9

gives up the last remnants of the ego (potapanu) he becomes
natural. When one attains naturalness (sahaj state) he can
continuously remain in the awareness as the Self (atma
upayog).
Drama begins when ‘I-ness’ decreases
Potapanu (‘I-ness’) is a very big word. There is not even
a trace of ‘I-ness’ in ‘us’. Yet ‘we’ make Hiraba sit next to ‘us’.
People ask ‘us’, ‘Who is this?’ and ‘we’ would tell them, ‘This
is my wife.’ ‘We’ will say all that. ‘We’ will even tell Hiraba, ‘I
do not like to be without you.’ How good she must feel when
‘we’ tell her that!
But with ‘us’, it is all ‘dramatic’ (like acting in a play).
One man tells me, ‘Can you bless my land by gracing it with
your footsteps?’ I told him, ‘Why should I have any problems?’
‘We’ would also ask him about his land, such as when he made
the deal, how much he paid for it, etc. Some people may even
think that Dada has become a land broker!
If a person gets a benign white spot on his body but he
keeps showing it to me, I would gently rub my hand over it just
to satisfy him.
Questioner: That too is a drama, is it not?
Dadashri: It is all a drama. The whole day is a drama for
‘us’. All my actions of the entire day are a drama. If you take
‘us’ to your home for darshan, that too is as a drama. If it were
not a drama, then the ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) would be there.
Because there is no ‘I-ness’; the drama is exact. Otherwise, it
would be like, ‘I will have to go there for a visit. I will have to
go there to give darshan’, but there is no such thing within.
Therefore, all this is nothing but a drama. The whole
daylong I am doing a ‘drama’. When I sit in the satsang and
answer questions, that too is a drama. But the drama starts only
when the ‘I-ness’ (potapanu), decreases and not otherwise.

Aptavani-9

475

Still the ‘I-ness’ remains
Some people think to themselves, ‘Now I do not have
any ‘I-ness’ or ‘my-ness’ in me any more.’ And yet whole
daylong they live in kashaya. One claims he has no ‘I-ness’ and
yet he experiences kashayas. In fact his ‘I-ness’ is the basis of
his existence. His ‘I-ness’ does not go away. It is very difficult
to get rid of.
What does it mean to say that the ‘I-ness’ has gone
away? It means that one does not even have any voice in it. Do
you do according to what others tell you or do you have a
different voice of your own within you?
Questioner: It is separate.
Dadashri: That is the ‘I-ness’ – the potapanu. ‘We’ do
not have any voice of any kind. If someone tells ‘us’, ‘Dada, sit
over there’, ‘we’ will go and sit. ‘We’ would do so even if ‘we’
do not like to.
Questioner: This ‘I-ness’ is also related to the intellect
(buddhi) is it not?
Dadashri: The intellect is the sign of ‘I-ness’. As the
sense of ‘I-ness’ goes down, the proportion of the intellect goes
down too.
Questioner: What is the difference between ‘I-ness’
(potapanu) and ‘my-ness’ (maarapanu)?
Dadashri: My-ness is mamata and I-ness (potapanu) is
a big ego. It is not a nominal ego.
After attaining this Gnan, You have let go of the ‘I’ (hoon)
and ‘my’ (mamata), but You have not let go of potapanu - ‘Iness’. There is no doubt that You have become free from ‘I’ and
‘my’. What is the definition of mamata (my-ness)? It is to
worry about something of yours when it has been lost. You do
not experience any worry after something valuable is lost. This

476

Aptavani-9

shows that your ‘I’ and the ‘my’ are gone. Yet the ‘I-ness’
(potapanu) still remains.
Questioner: Does ‘I-ness’ mean individuality? I am
different from others, is that what it is?
Dadashri: The individuality is gone. Both ‘I’ and ‘my’
are gone, but the ‘I-ness’ still remains. This is because, no
matter how angry someone gets, no matter how much someone
insults, he will fight with that person but he will eventually bring
about resolution before he goes to bed. Therefore, this assures
us that the ego is gone; otherwise, the ego will carry on the
whole nightlong. A person without ego will fight but he will also
find a solution whereas a person with an ego will not. He will
continue to increase enmity. A person with mamata will holler
and complain even three days after his pocket is picked. The
moment someone reminds him of it, he will say, ‘What can I
do?’ Whereas to you once it (wallet) is gone, it is gone. That
shows that the ego of doer-ship (ahamkar) and mamata (‘myness’, the feeling of ‘this is mine’) are gone. However, the ‘Iness’ (potapanu) still remains. Just ‘see’ it.
That is why Krupadudev has said, ‘The Gnani Purush
does not have potapanu.’ Krupadudev has used the word
‘potapanu’; he has written something significant. What do you
think? Has he not used a great word? Now who can explain
this? How can someone explain in the language Krupadudev has
used?
Questioner: The Gnani Purush can explain that, can he
not?
Dadashri: Yes, because no one else can.
The authority is gone, the ‘I-ness’ remains
Questioner: Please explain the following Aptasutra of
Yours, Dada:
“How does the Gnani’s antahkaran (the inner component

Aptavani-9

477

of the mind, the intellect, the chit and the ego), work? ‘Potey’
the one who is the ‘I am’ moves away (from the non-Self
complex); then the Self is separate from the antahkaran.”
Dadashri: The antahkaran carries out the worldly
activities on the one side and the Self ‘does’ ‘it’s’ work on the
other. The Gnani does not have dakho-dakhal (interference and
hence it’s effect thereof).
What is antahkaran? It is that from which arises the
sense-intent of ‘doer-ship’ (karta bhaav) of ‘I am the doer’.
The Gnani remains separate from the antahkaran. After
attaining Gnan, Your real doer-ship does not remain, but your
relative doer-ship does. That means the discharge doer-ship
remains. But for You, there remains a slight dakhal; the effect
of seemingly becoming Chandulal, whereas for the Gnani there
is no dakhal. If ‘one - potey’ (‘I am’) moves away, then the
Self is separate from the antahkaran. ‘One (potey)’ has been
a resident in this antahkaran for infinite life times; that ‘one’
now moves away.
Questioner: Who is this ‘potey’? Please explain.
Dadashri: That verily is the ‘I-ness’ (potapanu). If ‘we’
tell you, ‘let us go to the park’ and you say, ‘No, I will not
come. I do not like to go there.’ That is ‘I-ness (potapanu)’.
The Gnani Purush does not have this ‘I-ness’. He will go
wherever you tell him to.
Questioner: Who exercises the ‘I-ness’?
Dadashri: That ‘one (potey)’ only! Verily the ‘one’, the
original one, the ‘I am’, is the one. He does not let go of the
seat. The realm of his authority (satta) is gone but ‘he’ does not
let go of the seat. Therefore, You have to gradually make ‘him’
let go of it. Now ‘his’ authority and realm is gone, so there is
no problem. It is not easy to let go of this seat. It is not easy
to let go of the ‘I-ness’ (the potapanu). Do you understand the

478

Aptavani-9

‘I-ness’ or not? There is a continuous feeling of ‘I-ness’ in
everything that has become a discharge. It is nothing but an
effect. The entire authority (realm) is gone. The root of ‘I-ness’
does not go away. It is not likely to go away suddenly. It will
eventually do so gradually.
‘We’ do not have any ‘I-ness’ (potapanu). So, You have
to become like that. ‘His’ authority (realm) is gone even for You,
after this Gnan, so sooner or later it will happen for You too; the
‘I-ness’ will go away. But You have to realize (janvoo) what
You have become. The ‘hoonpanu (the doer I)’; the ‘I’ with
weight and emphasis which is the charging ego, its authority and
its realm (satta) are gone. The belief of ‘I am Chandulal’ is
gone, however in discharge, you continue to have the gnan
(knowledge) experience (anubhav) and conduct (charitra) of
‘Chandulal’. When the realm and the authority is gone; it is all
over. But ‘potey’, the ‘I am’ remains.
I, the lawyer, Mangaddas
Let me explain this ‘potey’ (the ‘I am’) to you. One
lawyer came to see me. I asked him, ‘What’s your name?’ He
replied, ‘Mangaddas.’ I asked him, ‘What do you do for a
living?’ He replied, ‘I am a lawyer.’ I asked him, ‘Do you say
‘I am a lawyer’?’ He replied, ‘Of course! I am a lawyer.’ I
asked, ‘So then who is this Mangaddas?’ He replied, ‘I’. Then
I asked him ‘Then who is the lawyer?’ he said, ‘I’. So, I told
him ‘So then you have to say, ‘I, the lawyer, Mangaddas’, right?’
This is what a person at someone’s door was saying. A
man knocked on someone’s door at night, when everyone was
asleep. The owner asked ‘Who is knocking on the door this late
at night?’ The voice replied, ‘I’. The owner asked ‘I’ who?
Identify yourself otherwise I will not open the door.’ So the
reply came, ‘I am the bavo (ascetic)’. The man asked, ‘But tell
me which bavo?’ So the man at the door said, ‘I, bavo
Mangaddas.’ Then the owner opened the door.

Aptavani-9

479

That is how this ‘I lawyer Mangaddas’ is. So when you
took this Gnan, the ‘Lawyer’ and ‘Mangaddas’ went away, but
the ‘potey – the ‘I’ still remains. Therefore ‘I-ness’ (potapanu)
still remains for You. When the other lawyer in the court says
something wrong, the ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) in you will express.
If someone comes here to discuss something complex
regarding satsang or any other topics, it is fine if the discussion
continues for an hour and half. There will be no dakhodakhal
(interference and its effects), from ‘us’. Elsewhere when that
happens, it may even result in matbhed - separation due to
difference in opinions. ‘We’ have no dakhodakhal. A task of
one hundred hours will be accomplished by ‘us’ within an hour!
But there will be no dakhodakhal. This is because ‘we’ do not
have any ‘I-ness’.
Protection of the prakruti is potapanu
Do you have ‘I-ness’ or not?
Questioner: It does arise sometimes.
Dadashri: Otherwise what remains? There is constant
and continuous awareness (jagruti) in the one who does not
have ‘I-ness’ (potapanu). Whatever unawareness (ajagruti)
there is; is all verily ‘I-ness’ (potapanu). The ‘I-ness’ will arise
immediately when someone tells you that you have no sense,
does it not?
Questioner: It does sometimes.
Dadashri: Does it happen everyday or only sometimes?
Tell me when it does not happen. All this is ‘I-ness’ only. That,
which one protects, is potapanu ‘I-ness’. To protect this
prakruti, the non-Self, is all ‘I-ness’. The loss of ownership of
the prakruti (the belief of ‘I am Chandulal’) has been
established through conviction (pratiti, shraddha – the belief of
‘I am the pure Soul’), but still the ‘I-ness’(potapanu) does not
leave, does it?

480

Aptavani-9

Questioner: ‘I-ness’ is bound to be there as long as ‘I
am correct’ remains, is it not?
Dadashri: There is no such thing as right or wrong. There
is no problem with the ‘I-ness’ of that kind. There are many
other types of ‘I-ness’. One gets upset at the slightest comment.
That is protection of the prakruti. Not only does one protect
the prakruti but he turns things around by employing deceit
(kapat). In that situation, the ‘I-ness’ is doubled. To vehemently
protect one’s self, is all potapanu. Not only do they protect
themselves, but they do it artfully and then dodge away. The
artful dodging is deceit.
Did you understand the meaning of I-ness; the potapanu?
One still continues to protect the non-Self, and that protection
is attained through artfulness and deceit (kada and kapat).
Questioner: To protect one’s prakruti is considered ‘Iness’, so when does that turn into deceit?
Dadashri: All the ‘I-ness’ goes into protecting the
prakruti the non-Self. The ‘I-ness’ without kapat (deceitfulness)
is better; it is softer, but the other is bad.
Questioner: You have said that protection of prakruti is
‘I-ness’ and to protect through artfulness and deceit is double
the ‘I-ness’.
Dadashri: Yes, that is double the ‘I-ness’. Even children
protect themselves, but there is no deceit in it.
Questioner: When a person knows that he has protected
his prakruti artfully and deceitfully, what is that?
Dadashri: He will recognize it if the deceit kapat is thin
but he will not if it is heavy and dense.
Aggression is intense potapanu
Do you have a desire to get rid of the ‘I-ness’
(potapanu)?

Aptavani-9

481

Questioner: Yes.
Dadashri: When the hurt inflicted upon any living being
stops, then those layers will begin to shed.
Questioner: What layers?
Dadashri: The layers of ‘I-ness’ and all other coverings
over the Self. Not only does one have the ‘I-ness’ but it is an
‘I-ness’ with an attacking nature. ‘I-ness’ with protection
(rakshan) is different from the ‘I-ness’ with an attack.
Questioner: This is very important information that has
just surfaced, Dada. You said that there are two types of
potapanu ‘I-ness’; one is with protection and the other is
associated with a tendency to attack.
Dadashri: Yes. When the ‘I-ness’ associated with
attacks goes away, then the ‘I-ness’ with protection will come.
That is the proper ‘I-ness’, until then all the ‘I-ness’ is regarded
as himsak bhaav; violence laden with violent intent. Only after
the ‘I-ness’ associated with attacking nature leaves, will the
dissolution of ‘I-ness’ associated with protection begin.
Questioner: Would you please explain further what this
attacking ‘I-ness’ is?
Dadashri: What good is any ‘I-ness’ that hurts others?
It is a different matter if that ‘I-ness’ is for the protection of
ones’ own prakruti; that is called ‘I-ness’ but the ‘I-ness’ that
hurts others, cannot even be considered ‘I-ness’.
What is the ‘I-ness’ in people like? Protection of their
prakruti is definitely there, but they also attack others. They
also strike (verbally and non-verbally) others. So do people not
need to get rid of this enormous ‘I-ness’? Protecting one’s
prakruti is ‘I-ness’. Are our mahatmas doing that? Alas, that
is precisely why it, the non-Self, does not become sahaj
(natural). Here, the moment one is faced with the slightest insult,
he protects the prakruti. This indeed will prevent the process of

482

Aptavani-9

sahajata (naturalness) from occurring, will it not?
The potapanu with protection may remain, but any other
kind of potapanu must leave. If someone says, ‘you don’t have
any sense’, there should not be any protection of the prakruti.
Who is the sole authority in this? It is the ego (ahamkar). The
one that opposes or resists is the ego. Who opposes everything
and challenges? It is the ego. But the ego is gone, is it not? So
the protection is being done unnecessarily, is it not?
So whatever happens is correct. You will not find such
discussion and talks in any scriptures. Talks about protection of
the prakruti are not to be found anywhere. Because, who will
not protect the prakruti? Everyone, except the Lord, protects
his or her prakruti. And You are protecting the prakruti even
though it is not Yours; it is an alien. You know that it is an alien
and having known that, You are still making arrangements to
marry ‘her’! Is that not a wonder?
The ego (ahamkar) and ‘my-ness’ (mamata) are gone,
but ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) remains. Is that not a wonder!
The ‘seer’ does not have ‘I-ness’
What do ‘we’ call ‘I-ness’ (potapanu)?
Questioner: Protection of prakruti is ‘I-ness’.
Dadashri: So should the prakruti be protected?
Questioner: ‘We’ are the ‘seers’ (jonara); what needs
to be done and what needs not to be done.
Dadashri: The ‘seer’ (jonaro) does not have any ‘Iness’ (potapanu). The seer can never have any ‘I-ness’. This
discussion is for the one who still protects the prakruti.
If you are going somewhere and on the way someone tells
you, ‘No you have to go the other way,’ do you get irritated at
that time?
Questioner: Yes.

Aptavani-9

483

Dadashri: That is the protection of the prakruti.
Otherwise, one would turn back just as fast; with the same
speed, with the same tone and with the same mood. With the
same mood that was there before. This is the talk of the final state!
The Test of ‘I-ness’
Say you are going somewhere with someone by car, he
tells you to get in the car and you do. A little later, he tells you
to get out of the car because someone else is coming instead,
what would you do? Would you just sit there? Would you tell
him, ‘I am not getting off?’
Questioner: I would get out.
Dadashri: Immediately?
Questioner: Immediately! I would get off.
Dadashri: Would you not say, ‘No I will not get out?’
Then as you walk away, he calls you back. You would go back
would you not? And you would do so without a change of
expression on your face, right?
So what have I said? If you can do this nine times over
without any effect at all within you, then I will tell you that you
have become ‘Dada’. If he does this to you nine times and you
get on and off nine times, and during each of those nine times,
You do not see the other person as the doer, and you see
vyavasthit as verily the ‘doer’, then You are free from ‘I-ness’.
And if when you are invited back, there is nothing in the mind,
the face remains smiling as if nothing has happened, and this is
the case while getting off also, then you are free from ‘I-ness’.
Then see the beauty of it all! What is this state called? It shows
that this ‘one’ is not protecting the prakruti and therefore the
potapanu is gone.
Protecting your prakruti is ‘I-ness’. But here the very
prakruti one wants to be liberated from is the one he is
protecting.

484

Aptavani-9

That is when ‘I-ness’ will go away
Now, I am not telling You that You should not protect
your prakruti but You should feel that your Gnan must attain a
certain level. I am not asking for such conduct (vartan or
charitra). When will such conduct come? When this becomes
established in your conviction (pratiti or shraddha), then it will
result in gnan (knowledge). When this knowledge increases as
experience (anubhav) then it will manifest in your conduct
(vartan, charitra).
If someone were to ask you to get out of the car, there
will be an initial effect (asar) but later as things calm down from
within, you will remember Gnan. This way it will gradually gel
and solidify from within and it will fit. At first, it comes as
conviction pratiti, and later in the process of arriving at the level
of experience (anubhav), you will stumble in ‘fitting’ the Gnan
at first, but later it will come in your conduct. Even a little
experience anubhav is more than enough.
If you are asked to get out of the car once or two times
and you come back to sit without experiencing annoyance from
within, or any change in the facial expression, that is very good
also. Otherwise, are people not likely to get upset and noncommunicative (risavu)? I think that would not be the case with
you, would it? Try to do that once, if such an occasion ever
arises. Get out of the car and sit back in it without getting upset
and non-communicative or spoiling your face.
Questioner: It is not as easy as You say, Dada.
Dadashri: It cannot be easy. But what is this? Why are
‘we’ discussing this? As this matter comes into your faith and
conviction (shraddha-pratiti), it will gradually come into your
experience (anubhav).
‘We’ are not telling you to do this. You simply have to
keep this in your awareness that you will have to stop protecting

Aptavani-9

485

your prakruti in this way. Any amount of protection of the
prakruti is wrong. Let the prakruti play its role with You
meeting your obligation as the neighbor. But, how can You
protect it in this way?
If someone tells you to get out of the car, then You should
tell your prakruti, ‘you are being told to get off, so please do
so.’ If later, the same person says, ‘Come in the car,’ You
should say, ‘Please get in, you are being invited in.’
Questioner: I cannot remember ‘this is prakruti’ during
every circumstance.
Dadashri: That much awareness (jagruti) will not remain
and that is why ‘we’ keep telling you this over and over again,
so that You remain aware. But here when ‘we’ wake one up,
he tells me he is getting up but he turns over and goes right back
to ‘sleep’!
We have the wonderful knowledge of vyavasthit, do we
not? Is vyavasthit not a great knowledge-tool (sadhan)?
Questioner: It is a great tool. It is wonderful.
Dadashri: It will all come to an end, will it not? You are
convinced of that, are You not?
Questioner: But, in our Gnan, will the ‘I-ness’ go away
when we understand vyavasthit exactly?
Dadashri: Yes it will. I have given you vyavasthit for the
purpose of becoming free from ‘I-ness’. It is a scientific thing
(vastu) and that is why it is exact. It is not something that has
been conjured up or made up. The dependency (avlamban)
that has been given to You is not wrong; it is exact.
Questioner: One does not want to let go of ‘I-ness’ and
yet he talks about attaining the Self, what is that all about?
Dadashri: Yes that is why ‘we’ are saying that if the ‘Iness’ goes away, everything will run on its own. Why hang on

486

Aptavani-9

to it without any use? Just let go of it! But one is not likely to
do so, is he? He will worry about, ‘This will happen or that will
happen’.
‘One (potey)’ becomes the Self upon attaining Gnan.
Then he says, ‘prakruti is not mine,’ and then what does he do?
He protects the prakruti. He is quick to protect the prakruti,
is he not?
Questioner: That is exactly what one does.
Dadashri: What are you saying? He protects it? This
protection that occurs is verily what you have to ‘see’ (jovoo).
It will all shed off on its own gradually as you come to know
(janvoo) this. There is nothing to be done to let go of it
suddenly. Nothing can be accomplished suddenly. Otherwise
one will have problems. It is through knowing (janvoo) that it
will dissipate gradually.
‘I-ness’ in the things one likes
Questioner: Please explain with examples where ‘I-ness’
is ordinarily present?
Dadashri: You see your ‘I-ness’ when someone gives
you your favorite ice cream and then takes it away before you
had a chance to taste it. You will see your ‘I-ness’ when
someone takes your favorite things away from you. In all such
instances, you will be able to see your ‘I-ness’ very clearly.
When your fondness for ‘I-ness’ goes away, so will the
‘I-ness’. Is it likely to go away as long as there is fondness for
it?
Questioner: I did not understand that. Are you talking
about fondness for things or fondness for the ‘I-ness’?
Dadashri: Only when the fondness for ‘I-ness’ goes
away. There is no problem if fondness for all other thing does
not go; fondness for ‘I-ness’ is very strong indeed. One will be

Aptavani-9

487

adamant and insist, ‘You will have to do exactly as I say.’
Therefore, there is no problem if fondness for all other things
does not go away.
Questioner: Is fondness for ‘I-ness’ the same thing as
making others do according to what we want (dharyu
karavoo)?
Dadashri: Not like that.
Questioner: Then what?
Dadashri: Everyone in the whole world has ‘I-ness’!
One becomes God when his ‘I-ness’, his potapanu goes away.
The one who has no ‘I-ness’ is a God. Although I have given
Gnan to everyone, all of you still have the ‘I-ness’. You will
become God when that ‘I-ness’ goes away. You are God at
present (from the absolute perspective), but you (the relativeSelf) have not become one because you still have the ‘I-ness’.
You will become God when you no longer have the ‘I-ness’.

Purusharth should begin with the right intent
The ‘I-ness’ will leave if there is Gnan, otherwise it will
not.
Questioner: But we have all attained Gnan so with Gnan
the aapopu – the ‘I-ness’ - keeps increasing, because later we
realize that the ‘I-ness’ has increased instead of decreasing.
Dadashri: That is not aapopu. This term aapopu is for
a very high spiritual level, Just prior to leaving the body, when
purity comes in, that is the state free of all kashayas, then the
residual ‘I-ness’ is considered aapopu or potapanu.
Questioner: The ‘I-ness’ may have gone but even then
one often does dakho – he interferes.
Dadashri: But what is the evidence that it has even gone?
You are saying that dakho occurs. It does not appear that this
‘I-ness’ is gone in anyone. There would be no more interference

488

Aptavani-9

once it leaves. There will not ever be any interference again. It
is not something that increases or decreases. It is a very real
thing. One will not see ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) again once it is
gone; it is gone forever. Do you feel as if it is partly gone but
it also partly remains? No, it is not like that. This ‘I-ness’ is not
something that it will return, once it leaves. To begin with, this
‘I-ness’ is something that is not likely to go. In fact, this is the
first time this subject about ‘departure of I-ness’ is even being
discussed. ‘We’ do not have any ‘I-ness’.
Questioner: What happens if one wants to bring back
the ‘I-ness’?
Dadashri: It will not come, will it? How can it return
once it is gone?
Questioner: This ‘I-ness’ is bound to go away with Your
Gnan, that is for sure, but how can it go away faster?
Dadashri: Just as we can increase the speed of a train,
we can also increase this speed if we employ the right tools
(sadhan). But You should look neither for haste nor for laziness
here. To do so, is all a form of imagination. All You have to do
is to maintain the bhaav - the inner intent that you want to get
rid of the ‘I-ness’. Having this bhaav does so much work that
the ‘I-ness’ will diminish constantly. But if you have the bhaav
of, No, there is no need to get rid of the ‘I-ness’ as long as the
worldly life is there, then that will be the case. After attaining
Gnan, ‘You’ have authority and realm over all these inner
bhaav. You do not have any authority and realm over everything
that is pending for discharge. There You have to let it discharge
(nikal) without interference.
Do you understand where Your authority and the realm
is? You have the authority and realm over the inner intent of, ‘the
‘I-ness’ has to go. The ‘I-ness’ is not needed anymore’, then
that will be the case. For how long can you make something
Yours when in fact it is not? Is it not a mistake to make

Aptavani-9

489

something that is not Yours, as yours? It is now very clear in our
Gnan that this ‘I-ness’ is not ‘Ours’. Is it not a mistake to
behave otherwise? ‘We’ do not have such ‘I-ness’.
‘I-ness’ melts as karmas are cleared
The actions of the Gnani Purush are constantly according
to the unfolding of His karma (the Gnani’s actions are udaya
aadhin), without any I-ness in it. The circumstances around
arise, come together, and unfold as scientific circumstantial
evidences and the Gnani follows them.
Questioner: If the Gnanis follow the course of the
unfolding of their karma, then how is it for others?
Dadashri: Theirs too is dependent on their unfolding
karma, but the difference is that they have ‘I-ness’ in it.
Questioner: You say that every person follows the
unfolding karma so is it possible for a person to maintain ‘Iness’ in it if he wants to?
Dadashri: One verily keeps, the ‘I-ness’.
Questioner: What about the mahatmas who have taken
this Gnan?
Dadashri: The mahatmas too have the ‘I-ness’.
Questioner: So how are the mahatmas maintaining the
‘I-ness’?
Dadashri: It remains. It is there. One is not keeping it; it
is there. One’s ‘I-ness’ dissolves to the extant of his accounts of
karma that are cleared. The amount that has dissolved is gone.
All these people do have ‘I-ness’ but their ‘I-ness’ is melting
away because they have also attained this Gnan.
Questioner: If the ‘I-ness’ remains, then one will charge
karmas, is that so?
Dadashri: No. There is no charging. This ego of ‘I-ness’

490

Aptavani-9

does not do any charging of new karmas. This ‘I-ness’ is a
discharge; it is that which will melt away.
Discharge ego is ‘I-ness’
Your ego is now gone. The ego of doer-ship, the charging
ego is gone. The ego of doer-ship (ahamkar) and ‘my-ness’
(mamata) both go away when ‘we’ give you Gnan. But the ‘Iness’, ego that is in discharge, the potapanu still remains.
What does this mean? It is the ego (ahamkar), which is
not living. Basically it is the ego (I am Chandulal). For example,
take the mixture of churmu (flour, ghee, and jaggery); if you roll
it in a ball, it is called a ladvo. If you pat it down and cut it into
pieces (chakta), it is called barfi churmu. And if you do neither
and leave it as it is, it is called churmu. All three are different
deserts. They are all different phases of basically the same thing.
In this example the churmu is the equivalent of the base ego of
‘I am Chandulal’ and ‘this is mine’ is mamata. The ghee and
jaggery mixed in the flour represents the coming together of the
other non-Self elements to form a basic mixture. Then various
forms of the mixture can take different shapes and forms. All
these are different expressions of the worldly ego which are all
residual, dying ego, after Gnan.
The ahamkar (ego) and mamata (my-ness) have left and
that is the part we are calling potapanu (I-ness); it looks like the
ego.
Questioner: So what is the difference between ego
(ahamkar) and ‘I-ness’ (potapanu)?
Dadashri: The ego will never move away; it will never
decrease.
Questioner: So does the ‘I-ness’ move away?
Dadashri: ‘I-ness’ will continue to decrease. ‘I-ness’
means a stock of baggage. A stock of ego; it continues to

Aptavani-9

491

discharge. And what is this ego like? There is already a stock
within and a new stock is also flowing in; both get together
inside. With us (mahatma), the charging ego is gone and the
stock within still remains. The pending stock of the ego within
other people (non-Self realized people) is also discharging, but
there is also a new charging, hence new filling (creation of new
karmas) is taking place simultaneously. For us it is discharging
and nothing charges anew. Therefore, the charging ego goes
away but the ‘discharge’ ego is still there. This discharge ego is
the ‘I-ness’.
Relationship between karma, ‘I-ness’ and
awareness
Questioner: So after Gnan, the ‘I-ness’ part is considered
a discharge?
Dadashri: That is a discharge; it is the karmic stock filled
in the last life (bharelo maal). As that stock goes away as it
discharges, so will the ‘I-ness’.
Questioner: So does the ‘I-ness’ remain on the basis of
this baggage?
Dadashri: Yes.
Questioner: So will the ‘I-ness’ go down as the baggage
empties?
Dadashri: Yes, the ‘I-ness’ will go down as the baggage
empties. Otherwise, it will not go down by itself. The ‘I-ness’
will end as the reservoir of pending karmas; karmas that remain
to be discharged, empty.
Whatever amount of ‘I-ness’ leaves; that much of it is
gone. If only a small amount leaves, it means more of it still
remains and if a lot of it leaves then there is relatively little of it
left. The greater the awareness (jagruti), the more the I-ness
(potapanu) will be removed. The degree of dissolution of I-ness

492

Aptavani-9

is in proportion to the level of prevailing awareness (jagruti). If
the awareness is greater, then greater and faster is the dissolution
of ‘I-ness’. One’s I-ness is slower to go if the awareness is
weak.
But You have hundred percent ‘I-ness’ after attaining this
Gnan. If the awareness is strong, then ten percent of ‘I-ness’ will
instantly go away and if it is weak then only two percent of it
will go away.
Questioner: Then a ninety percent of the ‘I-ness’ will
remain, will it not?
Dadashri: Yes. Those with greater awareness have
ninety percent remaining and those with lesser awareness will
have ninety-eight percent remaining.
Questioner: How does the remaining ‘I-ness’ then go
away?
Dadashri: It will come out the next time.
Questioner: So, does the ‘I-ness’ go away as the udaya
karma unfolds?
Dadashri: Yes, but the speed at which it goes away
depends on the degree, intensity and strength of the awareness
(jagruti). Therefore awareness will increase proportionately by
whatever percentage the ‘I-ness’ diminishes. Also, potapanu
decreases as the jagruti increases.
The Exact Awareness of Separation
Questioner: If awareness prevails as circumstances
unfold, then ten percent or two percent of the ‘I-ness’ has gone
away. So what kind of awareness is that? How does the
awareness (jagruti) that makes the I-ness diminish, work?
Dadashri: It is the awareness of ‘I am Shuddhatma’; it
is the awareness of the five Agnas. There is awareness of ‘Who
is this? Who am I?’ There is awareness that ‘the ‘one’ abusing

Aptavani-9

493

is not the abuser, he is a Shuddhatma.’
The One who knows, ‘This is not ‘I’, this is ‘I”, is the
Self. There should be awareness of, ‘This is ‘I’ and not this.’
Questioner: In which instances, is ‘potey’ (the Self) in
and in which instances is ‘potey’ not? What does ‘one’ ‘see’ in
it?
Dadashri: In all aspects. When ‘We’ give you Gnan,
‘We’ give you Gnan of what you are and what you are not.
Questioner: That separation that occurred within; you
called it the Soul!
Dadashri: That is it! That is the Atma - the Self.
Questioner: Now that state should remain constantly,
should it not?
Dadashri: One should not forget to apply the awareness
(laksha) to maintain the separation. Then later, continue to ‘do’
the same, again and again. Then one becomes the Self. When
you fasten the buttons on your shirt, you instinctively know that
the shirt can be removed; you have the knowledge ‘this part is
the shirt’ and ‘this part is me’, do you not? Or does it all appear
to be the same?
Questioner: No, one knows very well the separation
there. But the phases (avastha) of the mind, body and speech
arise and change constantly. So is it not here that an
uninterrupted awareness is called for, awareness of ‘this is I and
all this is not I’?
Dadashri: It is not all that complex and involved. In
certain circumstances there are instances where one has an
‘interest’ in it and that is when he has to say, ‘This is not mine.’
Otherwise, after Gnan, one has indeed been separated and
remains separate as the Self. Then later there is some
interference and mixing.

494

Aptavani-9

Questioner: So no matter what kind of results unfold,
one should have the laksha (awareness) ‘this is not mine’?
Dadashri: Yes, ‘this is I and this is not I’!
Questioner: Here I can see that I am separate from this
shirt, but what is to be ‘seen’ there?
Dadashri: That is exactly how one ‘sees’ it all separate
within.
Questioner: What does he ‘see’ in his vision (darshan)?
Give us one example.
Dadashri: Will you not know that, ‘This stone is separate
and my hand is separate’? Will you not know that these are the
attributes of the stone and these are the attributes of my hand?
Questioner: Yes. I would know all the attributes of the
stone, that it is heavy, it is cold, it is square…
Dadashri: It is smooth.
Questioner: So how can one remain in the state of ‘these
are not my attributes and these are mine’?
Dadashri: You should be aware and know ‘this coldness
is not mine, this softness is not mine, this smoothness is not mine,
this anger that occurred is not mine, this deceit that occurred is
not mine, the kindness that occurred is not mine and so on!
When you are lying down, can you not tell you are
separate from the bedding? You understand that don’t you?
Questioner: In that situation I can understand that the
bed and the one sleeping on top are separate but the problem
arises when it comes to maintaining awareness that the different
phases of the pudgal - the non-Self complex of thoughts,
speech and actions, are separate from the Self. In other words
the problem is with maintaining the focused awareness (upayog
jagruti).

Aptavani-9

495

Dadashri: There is some awareness in the situation with
the bed but awareness of the Self is gone away substantially, is
it not? The separation of the body from the bed is in his
awareness (khyal).
Questioner: That happens when I make him take a note
of the separation, then the one within will agree ‘Yes, both are
separate.’
Dadashri: He will believe when you give him the proof
(purava).
Questioner: So in the same token do we need to give
proof in order to understand and maintain the exact awareness,
‘All the non-Self complex phases are not mine and I am
Shuddhatma’?
Dadashri: Proof, evidence (purava) is the main thing.
Questioner: What is the proof or evidences that help to
understand this from within?
Dadashri: That which takes numerous evidences to get
the work done is ‘not mine’. Even when only three things get
together in order to get the work done; it is ‘not mine’. Even if
you do not cut a mango with a knife but bite into it with your
teeth, because everything had to come together in order for the
eating to take place, means it is ‘not mine’. You will have to
understand at the subtle level, will you not? Do you think you
can make do with understanding at the gross level?
Questioner: The main thing is at the subtlest
(sookshmatam) level.
Dadashri: Yes, the main thing is subtlest (at the level of
sookshmatam) and what will happen if you dissect it at the
gross level (at the sthool level)?
Questioner: But this is something new that you just told
us.

496

Aptavani-9

Dadashri: No it is not new, it has always been there from
the beginning. This knowledge was with the tirthankaras and it
is here today too. What can I do when according to your ‘law
book’ you claim it as new?
‘I-ness’ melts away with real experience
One person thought he had become absolute. I told him,
‘You have become nothing, do not grope around. There are a
lot of things you still have to become, you have a long way to
go and it is not easy to become Absolute.’ So he tells me, ‘But
the ego is gone.’ I said to him, ‘It has not gone. It is all there.
You have not checked into it.’
But it goes away gradually. As one suffers in the
experiences of worldly interaction and makes internal adjustments
through Gnan, then the real experience (anubhav) arises within,
and when such experiences increase, the ‘I-ness’ (potapanu)
leaves to that extent. To say that the ego is gone means the ‘Iness’ is gone. The end of ego means the end of ‘I-ness’. One
will have to go through a lot of experiences before even a
fraction of the ‘I-ness’ goes. (There is a lot of difference
between worldly experiences and the real experience within that
ultimately makes one the absolute Self).
The main ego, the charge ego, is gone. That is precisely
what is called the ego—ahamkar. But it is not at all easy to get
rid of the discharge ego. What does it mean to claim that the ego
has gone away? It means that there is no garva (doer-ship), no
garavata (wallowing and remaining stuck in worldly comforts)
and no potapanu (‘I-ness’). Should all that not go? The ego is
gone for sure after Gnan; the charge ego is gone, so what kind
of ego remains? The discharge ego! The discharge ego will
dissipate in proportion to the experience (resulting from the
application of Gnan) and then the ‘I-ness’ will gradually
decrease. Otherwise, it will not do so, not on its own. This is not
an easy thing to accomplish. One may ask, ‘Can it not be

Aptavani-9

497

accomplished during the course of my life?’ I say, ‘Moksha final liberation can be attained in one or two more life times.
What is the point of expecting anything else?’ What is the benefit
of wrong expectations?
All this is also ‘I-ness’
There will not be any more garva or garavata once the
‘I-ness’ has dissolved away. Here the garva and garavata still
remain (in discharge). What are the attributes of the one without
‘I-ness’? Such a person will accept whatever abuse people give
him. He will accept any beating. To side with the ego is
considered ‘I-ness’. To lose upayog – to lose the awareness of
‘I am separate from the body’- is called ‘I-ness’.
Even when You lose upayog for a little while; it is called
‘I-ness’. You say that you ‘become one with whatever goes on
inside, you become tanmayakar (engrossed) with it but later
you become aware of it’, all that occurs because of your ‘Iness’.

Purusharth is needed in whatever is
unfolding in front of you
Questioner: Is vyavasthit formed in such a way that it
makes one remain absorbed (tanmayakar) in the unfolding
karma (udaya)?
Dadashri: That is precisely how vyavasthit is; that is the
definition of udaya - unfolding karma. Vyavasthit is such that
one will become engrossed in the unfolding karma, he will
become the owner of thoughts, speech and actions (tanmayakar).
And that is where purusharth - independent spiritual endeavor
- is to be applied. At that moment (tapa) inner penance will
occur for sure.
When will one arrive at such a subtle understanding? It
will happen only when one gets into it, with applied awareness
(purusharth).

498

Aptavani-9

Questioner: I used to become tanmayakar in my
prakruti when I did not have Gnan.
Dadashri: Yes, you did it customarily and happily. What
is more; you even liked it. The moment one has a thought about
drinking alcohol; he becomes tanmayakar (absorbed) in it. He
likes that. But what happens now after Gnan? Now the Self
(potey) remains separate from within, where situations arise
which the Self does not like. When dislike arises, this dislike is
in the form of penance (tapa).
Questioner: So, does that mean that what he previously
used to like is precisely what he does not like anymore?
Dadashri: Yes. Liking binds prakruti and disliking
dissolves it.
The unfolding karma (udaya karma) that has to be dealt
with according to the unfolding (vyavasthit) is very harmful. As
it is, everything is a discharge (nikali) but it is very detrimental
to the goal of exposing the full Gnan of the Self.
Questioner: I did not really understand that.
Dadashri: Vyavasthit should be such that it supports the
purusharth. Vyavasthit working against purusharth is negative
vyavasthit; wrong vyavasthit. If it is not to your liking, let it be.
Even if you do not like it, the fact that you do not like it, shows
that it is the Atma (the Self). Where there is ‘I do not like’,
means that you are there as Atma.
Questioner: But vyavasthit is whatever that has come,
has come, but now, what should one do?
Dadashri: You have to do the purusharth in whatever
comes along.
There lies the strength of Pragnya - the
direct light of the Soul
Questioner: So when ‘he’ becomes absorbed

Aptavani-9

499

(tanmayakar) under the dictates of vyavasthit, we should not let
‘him’ become tanmayakar. Now to maintain this separation….
Dadashri: That ‘action’ is verily the purusharth.
Questioner: Who keeps this separation?
Dadashri: You have to do that. What do you mean who
has to do it? The one, who keeps the separation, will keep it.
But You have to decide ‘I want to remain separate’. When You
are the pragnya, You will ‘do’ this; keep the separation. When
you remain as Chandulal (in ignorance – agnya); you will
become tanmayakar. But You have to make a decision. If it
happens on this side, know that pragnya has done it, if it
happens on the other side; know that agnya - ignorance - has
done it. You have to decide, ‘I want to do only purusharth. I
have become a Purush. Dada has made me a Purush; the Soul,
the Self. He has separated Purush and prakruti. Therefore, I
want to do purusharth.’ That is what You have to decide.
Otherwise, on the most part, most of the energy goes into
the prakruti the entire day; the water just goes to waste flowing
this way.
This is how the experience as the Self grows
Questioner: So the ‘I-ness’ will remain as long as there
are unfolding karmas, correct?
Dadashri: The karma will continue to unfold even after
the ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) is gone, but there is no potapanu in
those unfolding karmas.
Questioner: Yes, that will only happen when the ‘I-ness’
goes away, right?
Dadashri: Even thereafter, the karmas will continue to
unfold but there will be no ‘I-ness’ in it. ‘We’ too have unfolding
karma, but there is no ‘I-ness’. Everyone’s ‘I-ness’ is there
where the karmas unfold. But it will continue to go down after

500

Aptavani-9

attaining Gnan. It will not increase. It will go down until it ends
completely.
Questioner: And one sees the ‘I-ness’ when the karma
unfolds, does he not?
Dadashri: Yes. That is why ‘we’ have said that the
experience of the Self will increase as the karmas unfold and the
ego will go down. This is how everything becomes regular. The
experience as the Self (anubhav) then continues to increase.
Specific details of ‘seeing and knowing’
Questioner: So then we do not have to worry about
getting rid of the ego. It will happen automatically in an orderly
manner as the karmas unfold (udaya) and all we have to do is
simply ‘see’ it.
Dadashri: No. You still have to do purusharth. Do not
take the approach, ‘I do not have to do anything’. In fact, the
real purusharth remains to be done from this moment onwards.
Questioner: But what other purusharth is there besides
just ‘being the seer (jonaro)’?
Dadashri: You have to ‘see continuously’ but such
‘seeing’ does not occur. Such continuous ‘seeing’ is not easy.
You have to do purusharth. If You employ purusharth, then
You will be able to ‘see’.
Questioner: So what kind of purusharth is to be done?
Dadashri: Only the purusharth to ‘see’ what is ‘burning’
within and how is it burning.
Questioner: That is the ‘seeing’ is it not?
Dadashri: But this ‘seeing’ (jovanoo) it is not easy. Man
cannot ‘see’; he is not able to ‘see’. If he does purusharth then
he will be able to ‘see’. If one becomes the Self (the Purush)
and does the purusharth of not becoming absorbed
(tanmayakar), then only the ‘seeing’ is possible. Otherwise

Aptavani-9

501

seeing has no meaning after becoming absorbed. It is meaningless.
Questioner: Ah ha! He becomes tanmayakar and then
he tries to ‘see’!!
Dadashri: Yes, that is why it is all meaningless!
Questioner: So then what kind of separation do we have
to maintain in order to ‘see’?
Dadashri: After doing purusharth! If on the basis of
vyavasthit, you happen to become absorbed with it, then do not
let it happen and You remain as the Self; keep that separate, and
‘see’ it separate. That verily is the purusharth! Now such
‘seeing and knowing (jovoo and janvoo),’ does not (generally)
remain, does it?
The mahatmas say that they ‘see and know’ only. They
all say that they remain in the state of ‘seeing and knowing’.
They say ‘all we have to do is see and know.’ I tell them, ‘That
is very good!?!’ But how are they to ‘see and know’? Even
when they make this claim, I simply let go. I recognize and
understand that the first standard in school is always thus.
Questioner: But the karmas continue to unfold twenty
four hours a day, do they not?
Dadashri: Yes, karmas continue to unfold all day. Then
along with it, there is also the state of being absorbed
(tanmayakar). But along with that the purusharth of keeping
the two separate is also at work. However, that purusharth is
weak in many places. Most of the time one remains in the state
of being absorbed (tanmayakar). The whole day long, everything
passes by in this manner without one realizing it. Then he claims,
‘I saw and knew’. Arey! What did you ‘see and know’ What
do you consider ‘seeing and knowing’? Did you see the ghosts?
What is to be ‘seen’? If vyavasthit is engaging and
dragging ‘you’ in the process of becoming absorbed

502

Aptavani-9

(tanmayakar), You have to know that vyavasthit is taking ‘you’
in that direction, so You bring it back into the Self, and ‘see’
from there the beginning of the suffering and how it began. Such
purusharth is needed.
Do you think it is easy to, ‘see and know’? But all the
mahatmas claim, ‘Dada, we see and know, the whole day.’ I
tell them that is good because they would not understand the
subtleness of it and I will have problem explaining to them. I am
discussing this degree of subtleness just because of you,
otherwise it cannot be discussed.
Questioner: But this is necessary.
Dadashri: But whom should I tell? I can tell only certain
people.
The attainment in Akram Vignan
Having attained this Gnan, You have become the Self
(Atma), but not the Absolute Self. It is pratiti Atma - the Self
in conviction (this conviction of ‘I am the Self’ is for ever). Then
the prakruti has become upsham – it has settled down, yet the
Self is only at the level of conviction (pratiti Atma). All our
mahatmas have the pratiti Atma.
Questioner: So after attaining this Gnan, the entire
prakruti has become upsham; it has quietened down.
Dadashri: Yes, it is more than enough when it becomes
upsham. Just to arrive at the state of upsham is the greatest
purusharth. That in itself is the greatest attainment (labdhi) and
nothing compares to it.
Questioner: What purusharth is there just because the
prakruti has quieted down?
Dadashri: That also is called purusharth. Prakruti will
become helpful to You when it becomes upsham. So it will
produce results when You do purusharth. Your purusharth will

Aptavani-9

503

not be fruitful if the prakruti does not become upsham.
Questioner: But that prakruti is still going to act up and
overflow, is it not?
Dadashri: It may act up. But even then, sooner or later
the purusharth of the person with upsham prakruti will be
fruitful. It will not overflow once it becomes upsham. The state
of upsham will not go away.
The one whose prakruti has become upsham
stays with the Gnani
Questioner: What is in upsham?
Dadashri: Upsham means that a person will not go
away no matter how much negative pressure is put on him. He
will go astray for a while but he will come back. He will not go
away from here, all others will. They will run away if you harass
them enough but not the one with upsham prakruti. He would
not leave even if he were to die.
Questioner: Where will he run to?
Dadashri: Wherever he can, wherever he feels safe.
Questioner: So he will run away from You, Dada?
Dadashri: Yes. And if I am not here and if he is sitting
with someone else, he will run away from there too but the one
with upsham will not run away even if you were to kill him.
The grave danger of leaving the Gnani Purush
And the other will start his own agenda: ‘This is yours,
ours is different’. He will start a separate sect (gachha). When
three people get together, it is called a sect. When three ascetics
or any three people get together and worship, it is considered
a gachha. The Lord has called it a division; a gachha. What is
wrong with divisions? You can always find three people.

504

Aptavani-9

Questioner: But the path to liberation is not to be found
where there are sectarian divisions (gachha), is it?
Dadashri: Yes, when there is a sect; that is the end of it.
But people create such divisions: ‘this is mine, mine is different
and their’s is different’.
Questioner: Then he is bound to fall.
Dadashri: He has already fallen. He falls from the
moment he moves away.
Speech without ownership is the sign of the
Gnani
Entire ‘I-ness’ (potapanu) gradually melts down to zero
after attaining Gnan. One is considered a Gnani when it goes
down to zero. Then his speech (vani) will change. Vani flows
only after potapanu leaves. By whatever proportion the ‘I-ness’
goes away, that much speech will arise, and that speech is
correct. Until then all speech is wrong. Elsewhere, except for
those who have taken our Gnan, there is a presence of ‘I-ness’
whenever people speak. Such speech will not have any effect;
it will blow away in the wind. That is not speech; it is all relative.
As for our mahatmas, they are to speak only after their ‘I-ness’
is gone, otherwise they are not to speak.
Moreover can any mahatma who has taken Gnan speak
even a single sentence that is his own and stand independently?
No. This is the sign that no one has attained the ‘main’ thing yet.
No one has attained the absolute state yet. He cannot speak
even a single sentence; if he did, I would be astonished. I would
say, ‘that is enough proof!’ I would realize that it is amazing if
I were to hear even a single sentence! But it is not possible, is
it? How can he utter even a single sentence? How can vani
(speech) flow? How can the speech without ownership flow?
Questioner: It would be more than enough if one were
to methodically say exactly what you say.

Aptavani-9

505

Dadashri: It would be like gold if they spoke methodically
and exactly as it is.
Only understand this Vignan, you need not
do anything else
Questioner: This talk of purusharth is extremely
important. It is all that is left after Gnan.
Dadashri: Not everyone has understood this very subtle
talk. Out there it is all thoka thok futile and baseless intellectual
discussions. How very subtle all this is, but people have never
known about it. They have not even heard about it!!
Questioner: And the absolute Self is as subtle as space.
And do we not have to understand the Gnan at that level of
subtlety?
Dadashri: Yes. One has to latch on to that but there is
no need to run after it. You do not have to run to the point it
makes your stomach hurt. All You need to do is understand
what it is being said. Everything is to be done easily and naturally
(sahajata). Therefore, You don’t have to do anything; You only
have to understand.
Everyone has a desire to analyze things deeply, don’t
they? Who does not have a desire to be wealthy? Why do these
people run around in the market for so many years? The whole
world runs after wealth and money, does it not?
Questioner: But we can make progress through the
support of Your words, can we not? Can we not progress
towards the main thing by hanging on to Your every word?
Dadashri: Yes, at first one enters this way slowly. He will
enter through this gate first then he will reach the second gate.
But what happens if one has not entered even the first gate?
Only the one who understands this will
attain
Questioner: We are able to recognize that You are at a

506

Aptavani-9

highly elevated stage when such subtle talks come out, and we
are awe stricken by Your great divinity and about Your Vignan
of Akram.
Dadashri: Not everyone recognizes through this
understanding. Is it easy to recognize this? The person who
understands this state will attain this state. To gain this
understanding is not an easy thing to accomplish. Yes the one
who can ‘see’ that ‘our’ aapopu; the last remnant of ‘I-ness’ in
the living state - is gone, has grasped something very important.
That person has understood what ‘I-ness’ is.
One whose ‘I-ness’ is gone becomes
Parmatma
Now how does this ‘I-ness’ aapopu, potapanu go
away? By doing darshan of the person whose ‘I-ness’ is gone;
this is the ‘fitness’ (qualification or degree) of spiritual readiness
(paatrata), nothing else.
Questioner: Does it happen merely through doing
darshan?
Dadashri: Everything can happen with darshan. This
topic has come out only today. Has the word aapopu (‘I-ness’)
cropped up before? It opens up when the occasion arises.
God takes care of the one whose ‘I-ness’ goes away, so
then, where is the problem. Where do I have any such problem?
Let Lord Krishna ride the horses, ‘we’ simply have to ‘keep
seeing’ from within. So when will God take care of everything?
When You let go of your ‘I-ness’. That is why Krupadudev has
said, ‘bhagwat, bhagwat nu sambhadi leshey - God will take
care of the one who has become God.’ To become God, one
has to leave the ‘I-ness’.
It is not God’s responsibility as long as the ‘I-ness’
prevails. And when the ‘I-ness’ is gone, God is completely
responsible.

Aptavani-9

507

It will take a long time for the ‘I-ness’ (aapopu) to
depart. To begin with, at least settle everything with equanimity
with everyone around you. There is no difference between the
‘I-ness’ leaving and becoming God. God took on the responsibility
when ‘our’ ‘I-ness’ eventually left. ‘We’ do not have any
responsibility anymore. He took on ‘our’ responsibility when the
‘I-ness’ left. Now ‘we’ do not have any burden on ‘us’ and that
is why ‘we’ are moving about in all this leisure. And really ‘we’
have attained this state after searching for many past lives
whereas You have attained it in no time and so You should take
full benefit of it. Ultimately, Your work will get done when the
‘I-ness’ goes away.
There is no difference between the parmatma – the
absolute Self and the departure of ‘I-ness’. Nothing remains
except the absolute Soul, when ‘I-ness’ goes away.
Jai Sat Chit Anand

Glossary
Aadayee
Aagraha
Aashanka
Aavega
Abhaav
Abheda
Abheda drashti
Abhedta
Abhimaan

Abhipraya
Abrahmacharya
Abuddha
Acharan
Acharya
Adharma
Adhi
Adhikaar
Aadhin
Aadhinta
Adhyas
Agna
Ahambhav
Ahamkar
Ajumpo
Akadai
Akhand jagruti
Akkal
Alochana
Anatma
Antahkaran

Obstinacy
Insistence
Repeated suspicion
Emotional force
Dislike
Oneness
Vision of oneness
Oneness
Excessive pride, arrogance, in
Dada’s words “ego with rich
material” (the ‘My’ and ‘Mine’
materials attached to ‘I’, the ego)
Opinion
Non-celibacy
Without buddhi (intellect)
Conduct
Spiritual master
Doing wrong
Mental difficulties
Authority
Subservient
Total surrender
Constant belief of I am the
body
Spiritual directives
Egotistic expression
Ego
Restlessness
Egoistic inflexibility
Uninterrupted awareness
Intellect
Confess all the mistakes
Non-Self
Inner complex of mind-intellectchit and ego

Antaray
Antarsooj
Anubhav
Aasakti
Asang
Asangata
Asaiyam
Asatya
Ashubha
Atkan
Atmahimsa
Barkat
Bhaav
Bhaav karma
Bhaav mun
Bhanatar
Bhasha
Bhautik
Bheda
Bheekh
Bhodpan
Binharif
Bodha kada
Brahmacharya
Buddhi
Buddhi gnan
Charitra
Chaturai
Chintavan
Daanat
Darshan
Dehabhimaan
Dhanipanu
Dharma

Obstacles
Inner insight
Experience
Infatuation; Strong Attachment;
Covetous cleavage
Without company
A state of being free from all
association
Expression of kashaya
Wrong
Inauspicious
Intense inner obstacle
Violence to the self
Competence
Inner intent
Charge karma
Charging mind
Education
Language
Worldly
Separation
Beggary
Guilelessness
Non-competitive
Art of explanation
Celibacy
Intellect
Knowledge manifested through
the intellect
Conduct
Craftiness and cleverness
Envisions
Tendency
Vision
I am this body
Dominate as a husband
Attain the essence

Dharmastikaya
Dhyan
Drashti
Drashtibhed
Dravya karma
Dushamkaal

Ekavtari
Ekindriya
Ekmata
Gambhirata
Ganatar
Garavata
Garva
Gaaddha
Ghamand
Ghamandi
Gnan
Gnan indriyas
Gnan kada
Gnanavarniya karma

Gnan-avarniya
Gnata-drashta
Gruhasthis
Garva-ras
Gurukilli
Gurutam
Himsa
Himsak bhaav
Hoonpad

The element of motion
Meditation
Vision
A vision of division
Discharge karma
Aka as Kaliyug, this current
time cycle is characterized as a
time of lack of unity in people’s
thoughts, speech and action; an
era of moral and spiritual decline
You can achieve liberation within
one more lifetime
Single-sensory
All become unanimously
accepting; unified in agreement
Serenity
Reasoning ability, wisdom
Wallowing in worldly pleasures
Ego of doer-ship
Strong; deep
False arrogance
A fake show-off
Spiritual knowledge
Sense organs
Art of knowledge
Karma that obstructs the full
expression of the knowledge of
the Self
Knowledge obscuring karma
Knower-Seer
Married people
‘Juice’ of doer-ship
Special key
The highest
Violence
Violent intent
I-ness

Hum
Irsha
Jada
Jagrut
Jagruti
Jakki
Jalebee
Janvoo
Jonaar
Judai
Kaam
Kaamna
Kada
Kadhapo
Kalyan
Kaliyug

Kapat
Kaaran
Karmendriyas
Karunyata
Kashayas
Kathor
Keyf
Khandaan
Khandaani
Khatpat
Khench
Khumari
Kriya
Krupa
Kushanka
laachaar

I am something
Jealous
Matter or inanimate
Alert
Awareness
Strong headed
Crisp fried sweet soaked in sugar
syrup
‘Know’
‘Seer’
Separation
Sexuality
Intense craving
Art
Outburst that hurts others
Salvation
The current bad times, where
morality and sincerity have broken
down
Deceit
Cause
Organs of action
Compassion
Anger, pride, deceit and greed
Harsh or callous
Intoxication
Noble
Nobility
Meddling
Insistence
Extra pride with ‘my-ness’; an
aura of superiority
Activities
Grace
Destructive suspicion; negative
suspicions
Helpless

Lafru
Laghutam
Laksha
Lalacha
Lalachu
Latt
Lepaymaan
Lobhi
Lokasangnya
Loknindya
Maan
Mada
Mamata
Mamata
Masti
Matbhed
Maya
Mijaj
Mishra Mohaniya
Mishrachetan

Mithya

Mithyabhimaani
Mithyabhimaan
Mithya-gnan
Delusion

Something that possess a person
He is the smallest; the lowliest and
in matters of the Soul
Awareness
Greed laden temptation; intense
insatiable greed
An intensely greedy person
Habitual compulsion
The state of being covered;
Coated
Greedy
Societal influence
Public censure
Pride
Pride
My-ness
Attachment; ‘my-ness’
Worldly fun
Separation due to difference of
opinion
Illusion
Endless arrogance
Mixed belief deluding
Blending of consciousness, of the
Pure-Self and the Non-Self;
Partially pure, partially non-pure
sensation
Wrong; Contrary to one’s nature
or belief ; Perverted; False;
Deluded
Person with false pride with
myness
False pride and false my-ness
Wrong or Perverted knowledge;
Wrong assessment of values;
Mithyatva mohaniya
Wrong belief deluding

Mohaniya karma
Moksha marg
Moorchha
Naffat
Namrata
Napunsak
Nih-shanka
Nikali
Nimit
Nirahamkari
Nirakudata
Nirbhayta
Nirdosh
Nirleyp

Nirmaani
Nirmohi
Nirpeksha
Nisangata
Nischaya
Nihshank drashti
Nihshankta
Nishkaran karuna

Nispruha

Karma that is delusive and
causes attachment
Path to liberation
Deluded state
Shameless
Humility
Bisexual; Hermaphroditic
Suspicion-less state
Discharge
An apparent doer who is simply
instrumental in the process
Egoless
Bliss of the Self
Fear-less-ness
Without any fault
Absolutely unaffected; Without
any coverings or tendency to
adhere to any Karmas
The ego of being pride less
Is not a state of the end of his
illusion moha
Free from all expectations
There is a state of unattachment
in the presence of all attachments
Related to the Self
That he sees the world without
any fault
Completely suspicion-less
Compassion of the Gnani Purush
for us that has no ‘personal gain’
agenda behind it. Its only
‘reason’ and ‘purpose’ is to take
us to our Ultimate Freedom, or
Moksha
Without any inclination towards
needs, or desire, of any material
things of this world

Nispruhi
Niyanu
Nokarma
Nondha
Pakshapaat
Param vinay
Parmarth
Parmatma
Parmanus
Parsatta
Paryaya
Poojavani kaamna
Poojavu
Potapanu
Pragnya
Prakruti

Prarabdha
Pratibhav
Pratikraman
Pratiti
Pudgal bhaav
Punya
Purnapad
Purush
Purusharth
Purvagraha
Raag-dwesh
Rajipo
Rasam
Raudradhyan
Risad

Non-acquisitive
Firm inner resolution
Neutral
Intense mental note
Partiality
Ultimate humility
Absolute meaning; the ultimate
aim
The absolute Soul
Sub-atomic particles
Influence of other forces
Phases
Intense craving to be
worshipped
Worshipped
‘I-ness’
Direct light of Soul
The innate nature of one’s
relative Self that is, the non-self
complex
The effect of past karma; one’s
destiny; karma effect
Retaliating
Repentance
Conviction
Intent of the non-Self
Merit karma
Absolute state
Male; Self-realized person
Independent spiritual endeavor
Previously held opinions
Attachment-abhorrence
Pleasing the Gnani
Practice
Adverse internal meditation that
hurts the self as well as others
The one that gets upset and

Risavu
Rof
Roonanubandha
Saatvik
Sadhana
Sahaj
Sahaj kshama
Sahelo
Samadhi
Samayik

Samyak darshan
Samyaktva mohaniya
Sandeha
Sangnya
Sansar
Sansari swabhav
Santaap
Saiyam

Sapeksha
Sarad
Sarad
Saradata
Saspruha
Satya
Satyagraha
Satyug
Shakti
Shanka
Shankashil
Shraddha
Shrota

non-communicative
Upset & non-communicative
Self-importance
Past karmic ties
Good and worthy
Spiritual endeavor
Natural; Spontaneity;Naturalness
Natural forgiveness
Easy
Internal and external harmony
Focused application of the light
of the Self during introspective
meditation
The right vision.
Right perception deluding
Dubious
Association
Worldly life
Tendency to be worldly
Serious torment
Meaning a state without inner
anger, pride, deceit or greed
(kashayas)
Expectations
Straight-forward
Straight
Straightness
Inclined
Truth
Insistence on what one believes
to be the truth
An era of virtue and morality
Energy; power
Suspicion
Suspicion-laden
Faith
Listener

Shubha
Shuddha chetan
Shuddhatma
Shooraatan
Siddha Gati
Siddhi
Sohum
Sooj
Sookshma
Spardha
Spruha
Sthirata
Sthool
Stree
Swachhand
Swakshetra
Swamaan
Swaprashansa
Tanmayakar
Tanmayakar
Tanto
Taaran
Teeka
Tiraskar
Tiryancha Gati
Tragu
Tumakhi
Tundmijaji
Udaya
Udayakarma
Udvega

Good
Pure consciousness
Pure Soul
Fearlessness
Abode of the Absolute liberated
Souls
Special energy
I am that
Insight
Subtle
Competition
Acquisitiveness or inclination of
anything
Steadiness
Gross
Female
To act according to one’s own
will and intellect
Place of the Self
Self-respect
Compliment
Become engrossed
Become engrossed; become one
with situation
Intense mental note itself
A quick internal assessment, the
bottom line of any situations
Criticism
Contempt; scorn
The animal life form
Manipulative tantrum
Hot temper
Head strong
Fruition
Maturity of fruition of past
deeds
Emotional agitation

Unmattata
Upadhi
Upari
Updeshak
Upsham
Upayog
Vachanbud
Vahem
Vairagya
Vakta
Vaniks

Varte
Vastu
Vega
Vair
Vidhi
Vignan
Vinay
Vishaya
Vitarag
Vitaragata
Vitaragata
Vitarag bhaav
Vyabhicharini buddhi
Vyadhi
Vyatirek
Vyavahar
Vyavahar gnan
Vyavaharikta
Vyavasthit
Yaad

Sense of accomplishment,
Reaction of swelling with pride
Externally induced difficulties
Supreme
Preachers
Covered; smoldering
Continuous focused awareness
of the Self
Energy and power of word
Doubt
Dispassion towards the worldly
life
Speaker
Those who make a living
through their speech and
intellect, mostly businessman in
India
Prevails
The Self
Motion; neutral state
Vengeance
Special inner spiritual adjustment
Science of spiritual knowledge
Humility
Sensual pleasures, subject matter
Free from attachments
Detachment
State of absolute detachment
Complete non-attachment from
within
Is misleading intellect
Physical difficulties
Tertiary
Worldly interactions
Practical knowledge
His ability of worldly interactions
Scientific circumstantial evidence
Memory

Persons to Contact
Dada Bhagwan Parivar
Adalaj

: Trimandir, Simandhar City,
Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, Adalaj,
Dist.: Gandhinagar - 382421, Gujarat, India.
Tel : (079) 39830100, Email : info@dadabhagwan.org
Ahmedabad : "Dada Darshan", 5, Mamtapark Society,
Behind Navgujarat College, Usmanpura,
Ahmedabad- 380 014. Tel. : (079) 27540408
Rajkot
: Trimandir, Ahmedabad-Rajkot Highway, Nr. Targhadiya
Chokdi, Maliyasan Village, Rajkot. Tel.: 9274111393
Vadodara : "Dada Mandir", 17, Mama ni pol,
Opp. Raopura Police Station, Salatvada, Vadodara.
Tel. : (0265) 2414142, 9825032901
Bhuj
: "Trimandir", B/h Hill garden, Airport Road,Near Sahyog
Nagar, Bhuj (Kutch) Tel. : (02832) 290123
Godhra
: "Trimandir", Village Bhamaiya, Opp. FCI Godown,
Godhra, Dist - Pachmahal Tel. : (02672) 262300
Mumbai : Mobile : 9323528901
Kolkata :

Mobile : 9330133885

Bangalore : Mobile : 9341948509
U.S.A.

:

Dada Bhagwan Parivar (USA) +1 877-505-(DADA)3232
Dada Bhagwan Vignan Institute : Dr. Bachu Amin,
100, SW Redbud Lane, Topeka, Kansas 66606
Tel : +1 785 271 0869, Email : bamin@cox.net

U.K.

:

Satsang Activity Centre,College House, 15 College
Road, Harrow, HA1 1BA,
Tel. : +44 7956 476 253
Email : dadabhagwan_uk@yahoo.com

Kenya
Australia
UAE

: +254 722 722 063
: +61 421127947
: +971 557316937

Singapore : +65 81129229
New Zealand : +64 21 0376434
Germany

: +49 700 32327474

Website : www.dadabhagwan.org

